希波克拉底文集 (Hippocratic Corpus) - 四液理论相关篇章

来源：英文维基文库 (en.wikisource.org) + Project Gutenberg
URL：The Oath of Hippocrates (希波克拉底誓言): https://en.wikisource.org/wiki/Oath_of_Hippocrates?action=raw
Aphorisms (格言集): https://en.wikisource.org/wiki/Aphorisms?action=raw
On Airs, Waters, and Places (论气候、水与地域): https://en.wikisource.org/wiki/On_Airs%2C_Waters%2C_Places?action=raw
On Regimen in Acute Diseases (论急性病饮食): https://en.wikisource.org/wiki/On_Regimen_in_Acute_Diseases?action=raw
Project Gutenberg: https://www.gutenberg.org/files/72583/72583-0.txt
获取时间：2026-06-19
说明：西方四体液理论源头文献，支撑游戏外科手术·阶段一（四液理论）科技。
包含：希波克拉底誓言、格言集、论气候水与地域、论急性病饮食、论古代医学，
以及导论中对《论人的本性》(De Natura Hominis) 四体液理论的详细讨论。
英文翻译版（公有领域），译者主要为 Francis Adams (1849)。

============================================================

[英文原文内容 - English Original Text]



────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────

The Oath of Hippocrates (希波克拉底誓言)
译者：Francis Adams
来源：英文维基文库 (en.wikisource.org)
URL: https://en.wikisource.org/wiki/Oath_of_Hippocrates?action=raw

────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────

I SWEAR by Apollo the physician, and Aesculapius, and Health, and All-heal, and all the gods and goddesses, that, according to my ability and judgment, I will keep this Oath and this stipulation– to reckon him who taught me this Art equally dear to me as my parents, to share my substance with him, and relieve his necessities if required; to look upon his offspring in the same footing as my own brothers, and to teach them this art, if they shall wish to learn it, without fee or stipulation; and that by precept, lecture, and every other mode of instruction, I will impart a knowledge of the Art to my own sons, and those of my teachers, and to disciples bound by a stipulation and oath according to the law of medicine, but to none others.

I will follow that system of regimen which, according to my ability and judgment, I consider for the benefit of my patients, and abstain from whatever is deleterious and mischievous. I will give no deadly medicine to any one if asked, nor suggest any such counsel; and in like manner I will not give to a woman a pessary to produce abortion.

With purity and with holiness I will pass my life and practice my Art. I will not cut persons laboring under the stone, but will leave this to be done by men who are practitioners of this work.

Into whatever houses I enter, I will go into them for the benefit of the sick, and will abstain from every voluntary act of mischief and corruption; and, further from the seduction of females or males, of freemen and slaves.

Whatever, in connection with my professional practice, or not in connection with it, I see or hear, in the life of men, which ought not to be spoken of abroad, I will not divulge, as reckoning that all such should be kept secret.

While I continue to keep this Oath unviolated, may it be granted to me to enjoy life and the practice of the art, respected by all men, in all times! But should I trespass and violate this Oath, may the reverse be my lot!


────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────

Aphorisms (格言集)
译者：Francis Adams
来源：英文维基文库 (en.wikisource.org)
URL: https://en.wikisource.org/wiki/Aphorisms?action=raw

────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────

--- Section 1 ---
1. LIFE is short, and Art long; the crisis fleeting; experience perilous, and decision difficult.  The physician must not only be prepared to do what is right himself, but also to make the patient, the attendants, and externals cooperate.

2. In disorders of the bowels and vomitings, occurring spontaneously, if the matters purged be such as ought to be purged, they do good, and are well borne; but if not, the contrary.  And so artificial evacuations, if they consist of such matters as should be evacuated, do good, and are well borne; but if not, the contrary.  One, then, ought to look to the country, the season, the age, and the diseases in which they are proper or not.

3. In the athletæ, embonpoint, if carried to its utmost limit, is dangerous, for they cannot remain in the same state nor be stationary; and since, then, they can neither remain stationary nor improve, it only remains for them to get worse; for these reasons the embonpoint should be reduced without delay, that the body may again have a commencement of reparation.  Neither should the evacuations, in their case, be carried to an extreme, for this also is dangerous, but only to such a point as the person's constitution can endure.  In like manner, medicinal evacuations, if carried to an extreme, are dangerous; and again, a restorative course, if in the extreme is dangerous.

4. A slender and restricted diet is always dangerous in chronic diseases, and also in acute diseases, where it is not requisite.  And again, a diet brought to the extreme point of attenuation is dangerous; and repletion, when in the extreme, is also dangerous.

5. In a restricted diet, patients who transgress are thereby more hurt (than in any other?); for every such transgression, whatever it may be, is followed by greater consequences than in a diet somewhat more generous.  On this account, a very slender, regulated, and restricted diet is dangerous to persons in health, because they bear transgressions of it more difficultly.  For this reason, a slender and restricted diet is generally more dangerous than one a little more liberal.

6. For extreme diseases, extreme methods of cure, as to restriction, are most suitable.

7. When the disease is very acute, it is attended with extremely severe symptoms in its first stage; and therefore an extremely attenuating diet must be used.  When this is not the case, but it is allowable to give a more generous diet, we may depart as far from the severity of regimen as the disease, by its mildness, is removed from the extreme.

8. When the disease is at its height, it will then be necessary to use the most slender diet.

9. We must form a particular judgment of the patient, whether he will support the diet until the acme of the disease, and whether he will sink previously and not support the diet, or the disease will give way previously, and become less acute.

10. In those cases, then, which attain their acme speedily, a restricted diet should be enjoined at first; but in those cases which reach their acme later, we must retrench at that period or a little before it; but previously we must allow a more generous diet to support the patient.

11. We must retrench during paroxysms, for to exhibit food would be injurious.  And in all diseases having periodical paroxysms, we must restrict during the paroxysms.

12. The exacerbations and remissions will be indicated by the diseases, the seasons of the year, the reciprocation of the periods, whether they occur every day, every alternative day, or after a longer period, and by the supervening symptoms; as, for example, in pleuritic cases, expectoration, if it occur at the commencement, shortens the attack, but if it appear later, it prolongs the same; and in the same manner the urine, and alvine discharges, and sweats, according as they appear along with favorable or unfavorable symptoms, indicate diseases of a short or long duration.

13. Old persons endure fasting most easily; next, adults; young persons not nearly so well; and most especially infants, and of them such as are of a particularly lively spirit.

14. Growing bodies have the most innate heat; they therefore require the most food, for otherwise their bodies are wasted.  In old persons the heat is feeble, and therefore they require little fuel, as it were, to the flame, for it would be extinguished by much.  On this account, also, fevers in old persons are not equally acute, because their bodies are cold.

15. In winter and spring the bowels are naturally the hottest, and the sleep most prolonged; at these seasons, then, the most sustenance is to be administered; for as the belly has then most innate heat, it stands in need of most food.  The well-known facts with regard to young persons and the athletæ prove this.

16. A humid regimen is befitting in all febrile diseases, and particularly in children, and others accustomed to live on such a diet.

17. We must consider, also, in which cases food is to be given once or twice a day, and in greater or smaller quantities, and at intervals.  Something must be conceded to habit, to season, to country, and to age.

18. Invalids bear food worst during summer and autumn, most easily in winter, and next in spring.

19. Neither give nor enjoin anything to persons during periodical paroxysms, but abstract from the accustomed allowance before the crisis.

20. When things are at the crisis, or when they have just passed it, neither move the bowels, nor make any innovation in the treatment, either as regards purgatives or any other such stimulants, but let things alone.

21. Those things which require to be evacuated should be evacuated, wherever they most tend, by the proper outlets.

22. We must purge and move such humors as are concocted, not such as are unconcocted, unless they are struggling to get out, which is mostly not the case.

23. The evacuations are to be judged of not by their quantity, but whether they be such as they should be, and how they are borne.  And when proper to carry the evacuation to deliquium animi, this also should be done, provided the patient can support it.

24. Use purgative medicines sparingly in acute diseases, and at the commencement, and not without proper circumspection.

25. If the matters which are purged be such as should be purged, the evacuation is beneficial, and easily borne; but, if otherwise, with difficulty.


--- Section 2 ---
1. In whatever disease sleep is laborious, it is a deadly symptom; but if sleep does good, it is not deadly.

2. When sleep puts an end to delirium, it is a good symptom.

3. Both sleep and insomnolency, when immoderate, are bad.

4. Neither repletion, nor fasting, nor anything else, is good when more than natural.

5. Spontaneous lassitude indicates disease.

6. Persons who have a painful affection in any part of the body, and are in a great measure sensible of the pain, are disordered in intellect.

7. Those bodies which have been slowly emaciated should be slowly recruited; and those which have been quickly emaciated should be quickly recruited.

8. When a person after a disease takes food, but does not improve in strength, it indicates that the body uses more food than is proper; but if this happen when he does not take food, it is to be understood evacuation is required.

9. When one wishes to purge, he should put the body into a fluent state.

10. Bodies not properly cleansed, the more you nourish the more you injure.

11. It is easier to fill up with drink than with food.

12. What remains in diseases after the crisis is apt to produce relapses.

13. Persons in whom a crisis takes place pass the night preceding the paroxysm uncomfortably, but the succeeding night generally more comfortably.

14. In fluxes of the bowels, a change of the dejections does good, unless the change be of a bad character.

15. When the throat is diseased, or tubercles (phymata) form on the body, attention must paid to the secretions; for if they be bilious, the disease affects the general system; but if they resemble those of a healthy person, it is safe to give nourishing food.

16. When in a state of hunger, one ought not to undertake labor.

17. When more food than is proper has been taken, it occasions disease; this is shown by the treatment.

18. From food which proves nourishing to the body either immediately or shortly, the dejections also are immediate.

19. In acute diseases it is not quite safe to prognosticate either death or recovery.

20. Those who have watery discharges from their bowels when young have dry when they are old; and those who have dry discharges when they are young will have watery when they are old.

21. Drinking strong wine cures hunger.

22. Diseases which arise from repletion are cured by depletion; and those that arise from depletion are cured by repletion; and in general, diseases are cured by their contraries.

23. Acute disease come to a crisis in fourteen days.

24. The fourth day is indicative of the seventh; the eighth is the commencement of the second week; and hence, the eleventh being the fourth of the second week, is also indicative; and again, the seventeenth is indicative, as being the fourth from the fourteenth, and the seventh from the eleventh.

25. The summer quartans are, for the most part, of short duration; but the autumnal are protracted, especially those occurring near the approach of winter.

26. It is better that a fever succeed to a convulsion, than a convulsion to a fever.

27. We should not trust ameliorations in diseases when they are not regular, nor be much afraid of bad symptoms which occur in an irregular form; for such are commonly inconstant, and do not usually continue, nor have any duration.

28. In fevers which are not altogether slight, it is a bad symptom for the body to remain without any diminution of bulk, or to be wasted beyond measure; for the one state indicates a protracted disease, and the other weakness of body.

29. If it appear that evacuations are required, they should be made at the commencement of diseases; at the acme it is better to be quiet.

30. Toward the commencement and end of diseases all the symptoms are weaker, and toward the acme they are stronger.

31. When a person who is recovering from a disease has a good appetite, but his body does not improve in condition, it is a bad symptom.

32. For the most part, all persons in ill health, who have a good appetite at the commencement, but do not improve, have a bad appetite again toward the end; whereas, those who have a very bad appetite at the commencement, and afterward acquire a good appetite, get better off.

33. In every disease it is a good sign when the patient's intellect is sound, and he is disposed to take whatever food is offered to him; but the contrary is bad.

34. In diseases, there is less danger when the disease is one to which the patient's constitution, habit, age, and the season are allied, than when it is one to which they are not allied.

35. In all diseases it is better that the umbilical and hypogastric regions preserve their fullness; and it is a bad sign when they are very slender and emaciated; in the latter case it is dangerous to administer purgatives.

36. Persons in good health quickly lose their strength by taking purgative medicines, or using bad food.

37. Purgative medicines agree ill with persons in good health.

38. An article of food or drink which is slightly worse, but more palatable, is to be preferred to such as are better but less palatable.

39. Old have fewer complaints than young; but those chronic diseases which do befall them generally never leave them.

40. Catarrhs and coryza in very old people are not concocted.

41. Persons who have had frequent and severe attacks of swooning, without any manifest cause, die suddenly.

42. It is impossible to remove a strong attack of apoplexy, and not easy to remove a weak attack.

43. Of persons who have been suspended by the neck, and are in a state of insensibility, but not quite dead, those do not recover who have foam at the mouth.

44. Persons who are naturally very fat are apt to die earlier than those who are slender.

45. Epilepsy in young persons is most frequently removed by changes of air, of country, and of modes of life.

46. Of two pains occurring together, not in the same part of the body, the stronger weakens the other.

47. Pains and fevers occur rather at the formation of pus than when it is already formed.

48. In every movement of the body, whenever one begins to endure pain, it will be relieved by rest.

49. Those who are accustomed to endure habitual labors, although they be weak or old, bear them better than strong and young persons who have not been so accustomed.

50. Those things which one has been accustomed to for a long time, although worse than things which one is not accustomed to, usually give less disturbance; but a change must sometimes be made to things one is not accustomed to.

51. To evacuate, fill up, heat, cool, or otherwise, move the body in any way much and suddenly, is dangerous; and whatever is excessive is inimical to nature; but whatever is done by little and little is safe, more especially when a transition is made from one thing to another.

52. When doing everything according to indications, although things may not turn out agreeably to indication, we should not change to another while the original appearances remain.

53. Those persons who have watery discharges from the bowels when they are young, come off better than those who have dry; but in old age they come off worse, for the bowels in aged persons are usually dried up.

54. Largeness of person in youth is noble and not unbecoming; but in old age it is inconvenient, and worse than a smaller structure.


--- Section 3 ---
1. The changes of the season mostly engender diseases, and in the seasons great changes either of heat or of cold, and the rest agreeably to the same rule.

2. Of natures (temperaments?), some are well- or ill-adapted for summer, and some for winter.

3. Of diseases and ages, certain of them are well- or ill-adapted to different seasons, places, and kinds of diet.

4. In the seasons, when during the same day there is at one time heat and at another time cold, the diseases of autumn may be expected.

5. South winds induce dullness of hearing, dimness of visions, heaviness of the head, torpor, and languor; when these prevail, such symptoms occur in diseases.  But if the north wind prevail, coughs, affections of the throat, hardness of the bowels, dysuria attended with rigors, and pains of the sides and breast occur.  When this wind prevails, all such symptoms may be expected in diseases.

6. When summer is like spring, much sweating may be expected in fevers.

7. Acute diseases occur in droughts; and if the summer be particularly such, according to the constitution which it has given to the year, for the most part such diseases may be expected.

8. In seasons which are regular, and furnish the productions of the seasons at the seasonable time, the diseases are regular, and come readily to a crisis; but in inconstant seasons, the diseases are irregular, and come to a crisis with difficulty.

9. In autumn, diseases are most acute, and most mortal, on the whole.  The spring is most healthy, and least mortal.

10. Autumn is a bad season for persons in consumption.

11. With regard to the seasons, if the winter be of a dry and northerly character, and the spring rainy and southerly, in summer there will necessarily be acute fevers, ophthalmies, and dysenteries, especially in women, and in men of a humid temperament.

12. If the winter be southerly, rainy, and calm, but the spring dry and northerly, women whose term of delivery should be in spring, have abortions from any slight cause; and those who reach their full time, bring forth children who are feeble, and diseased, so that they either die presently, or, if they live, are puny and unhealthy.  Other people are subject to dysenteries and ophthalmies, and old men to catarrhs, which quickly cut them off.

13. If the summer be dry and mortherly and the autumn rainy and southerly, headaches occur in winter, with coughs, hoarsenesses, coryzæ, and in some cases consumptions.

14. But if the autumn be northerly and dry, it agrees well with persons of a humid temperament, and with women; but others will be subject to dry ophthalmies, acute fevers, coryzæ, and in some cases melancholy.

15. Of the constitutions of the year, the dry, upon the whole, are more healthy than the rainy, and attended with less mortality.

16. The diseases which occur most frequently in rainy seasons are, protracted fevers, fluxes of the bowels, mortifications, epilepsies, apoplexies, and quinsies; and in dry, consumptive diseases, ophthalmies, arthritic diseases, stranguries, and dysenteries.

17. With regard to the states of the weather which continue but for a day, that which is northerly, braces the body, giving it tone, agility, and color, improves the sense of hearing, dries up the bowels, pinches the eyes, and aggravates any previous pain which may have been seated in the chest.  But the southerly relaxes the body, and renders it humid, brings on dullness of hearing, heaviness of the head, and vertigo, impairs the movements of the eyes and the whole body, and renders the alvine discharges watery.

18. With regard to the seasons, in spring and in the commencement of summer, children and those next to them in age are most comfortable, and enjoy best health; in summer and during a certain portion of autumn, old people; during the remainder of the autumn and in winter, those of the intermediate ages.

19. All diseases occur at all seasons of the year, but certain of them are more apt to occur and be exacerbated at certain seasons.

20. The diseases of spring are, maniacal, melancholic, and epileptic disorders, bloody flux, quinsy, coryza, hoarseness, cough, leprosy, lichen alphos, exanthemata mostly ending in ulcerations, tubercles, and arthritic diseases.

21. Of summer, certain of these, and continued, ardent, and tertian fevers, most especially vomiting, diarrhœa, ophthalmy, pains of the ears, ulcerations of the mouth, mortifications of the privy parts, and the sudamina.

22. Of autumn, most of the summer, quartan, and irregular fevers, enlarged spleen, dropsy, phthisis, strangury, lientery, dysentery, sciatica, quinsy, asthma, ileus, epilepsy, maniacal and melancholic disorders.

23. Of winter, pleurisy, pneumonia, coryza, hoarseness, cough, pains of the chest, pains of the ribs and loins, headache, vertigo, and apoplexy.

24. In the different ages the following complaints occur:  to little and new-born children, aphthæ, vomiting, coughs, sleeplessness, frights, inflammation of the navel, watery discharges from the ears.

25. At the approach of dentition, pruritus of the gums, fevers, convulsions, diarrhœa, especially when cutting the canine teeth, and in those who are particularly fat, and have constipated bowels.

26. To persons somewhat older, affections of the tonsils, incurvation of the spine at the vertebra next the occiput, asthma, calculus, round worms, ascarides, acrochordon, satyriasmus, struma, and other tubercles (phymata), but especially the aforesaid.

27. To persons of a more advanced age, and now on the verge of manhood, the most of these diseases, and, moreover, more chronic fevers, and epistaxis.

28. Young people for the most part have a crisis in their complaints, some in forty days, some in seven months, some in seven years, some at the approach to puberty; and such complaints of children as remain, and do not pass away about puberty, or in females about the commencement of menstruation, usually become chronic.

29. To persons past boyhood, hæmoptysis, phthisis, acute fevers, epilepsy, and other diseases, but especially the aforementioned.

30. To persons beyond that age, asthma, pleurisy, pneumonia, lethargy, phrenitis, ardent fevers, chronic diarrhea, cholera, dysentery, lientery, hemorrhoids.

31. To old people dyspnœa, catarrhs accompanied with coughs, dysuria, pains of the joints, nephritis, vertigo, apoplexy, cachexia, pruritus of the whole body, insomnolency, defluxions of the bowels, of the eyes, and of the nose, dimness of sight, cataract (glaucoma), and dullness of hearing.


--- Section 4 ---
1. We must purge pregnant women, if matters be turgid (in a state of orgasm?), from the fourth to the seventh month, but less freely in the latter; in the first and last stages of pregnancy it should be avoided.

2. In purging we should bring away such matters from the body as it would be advantageous had they come away spontaneously; but those of an opposite character should be stopped.

3. If the matters which are purged be such as should be purged, it is beneficial and well borne; but those of an opposite character should be stopped.

4. We should rather purge upward in summer, and downward in winter.

5. About the time of the dog-days, and before it, the administration of purgatives is unsuitable.

6. Lean persons who are easily made to vomit should be purged upward, avoiding the winter season.

7. Persons who are difficult to vomit, and are moderately fat, should be purged downward, avoiding the summer season.

8. We must be guarded in purging phthisical persons upward.

9. And from the same mode of reasoning, applying the opposite rule to melancholic persons, we must purge them freely downward.

10. In very acute diseases, if matters be in a state of orgasm, we may purge on the first day, for it is a bad thing to procrastinate in such cases.

11. Those cases in which there are tormina, pains about the umbilicus, and pains about the loins, not removed either by purgative medicines or otherwise, usually terminate in dry dropsy.

12. It is a bad thing to purge upward in winter persons whose bowels are in a state of lientery.

13. Persons who are not easily purged upward by the hellebores, should have their bodies moistened by plenty of food and rest before taking the draught.

14. When one takes a draught of hellebore, one should be made to move more about, and indulge less in sleep and repose.  Sailing on the sea shows that motion disorders the body.

15. When you wish the hellebore to act more, move the body, and when to stop, let the patient get sleep and rest.

16. Hellebore is dangerous to persons whose flesh is sound, for it induces convulsion.

17. Anorexia, heartburn, vertigo, and a bitter taste of the mouth, in a person free from fever, indicate the want of purging upward.

18. Pains seated above the diaphragm indicate purging upward, and those below it, downward.

19. Persons who have no thirst while under the action of a purgative medicine, do not cease from being purged until they become thirsty.

20. If persons free from fever be seized with tormina, heaviness of the knees, and pains of the loins, this indicates that purging downward is required.

21. Alvine dejections which are black, like blood, taking place spontaneously, either with or without fever, are very bad; and the more numerous and unfavorable the colors, so much the worse; when with medicine it is better, and a variety of colors in this case is not bad.

22. When black bile is evacuated in the beginning of any disease whatever, either upward or downward, it is a mortal symptom.

23. In persons attenuated from any disease, whether acute or chronic, or from wounds, or any other cause, if there be a discharge either of black bile, or resembling black blood, they die on the following day.

24. Dysentery, if it commence with black bile, is mortal.

25. Blood discharged upward, whatever be its character, is a bad symptom, but downward it is (more?) favorable, and so also black dejections.

26. If in a person ill of dysentery, substances resembling flesh be discharged from the bowels, it is a mortal symptom.

27. In whatever cases of fever there is a copious hemorrhage from whatever channel, the bowels are in a loose state during convalescence

28. In all cases whatever, bilious discharges cease if deafness supervenes, and in all cases deafness ceases when bilious discharges supervene.

29. Rigors which occur on the sixth day have a difficult crisis.

30. Diseases attended with paroxysms, if at the same hour that the fever leaves it return again next day, are of difficult crisis.

31. In febrile diseases attended with a sense of lassitude, deposits form about the joints, and especially those of the jaws.

32. In convalescents from diseases, if any part be pained, there deposits are formed.

33. But if any part be in a painful state previous to the illness, there the disease fixes.

34. If a person laboring under a fever, without any swelling in the fauces, be seized with a sense of suffocation suddenly, it is a mortal symptom.

35. If a person affected with fever, the neck become suddenly distorted, and he cannot swallow unless with difficulty, although no swelling be present, it is a mortal symptom.

36. Sweats, in febrile diseases, are favorable, if they set in on the third, fifth, seventh, ninth, eleventh, fourteenth, seventeenth, twenty-first, twenty-seventh, and thirty-fourth day, for these sweats prove a crisis to the disease; but seats not occuring thus, indicate pain, a protracted disease, and relapses.

37. Cold sweats occurring along with an acute fever, indicate death; and along with a milder one, a protracted disease.

38. And in whatever part of the body there is a sweat, it shows that the disease is seated there.

39. And in whatever part of the body heat or cold is seated, there is disease.

40. And wherever there are changes in the whole body, and if the body be alternately cold and hot, or if one color succeed another, this indicates a protracted disease.

41. A copious sweat after sleep occurring without any manifest cause, indicates that the body is using too much food.  But if it occur when one is not taking food, it indicates that evacuation is required.

42. A copious sweat, whether hot or cold, flowing continuously, indicates, the cold a greater, and the hot a lesser disease.

43. Fevers, not of the intermittent type, which are exacerbated on the third day, are dangerous; but if they intermit in any form, this indicates that they are not dangerous.

44. In cases attended with protracted fevers, tubercles (phymata) or pains occur about the joints.

45. When tubercles (phymata) or pains attack the joints after fevers, such persons are using too much food.

46. If in a fever not of the intermittent type a rigor seize a person already much debilitated, it is mortal.

47. In fevers not of the intermittent type, expectorations which are livid bloody, fetid and bilious, are all bad; but if evacuated properly, they are favorable.  So it is with the alvine evacuations and the urine.  But if none of the proper excretions take place by these channels, it is bad.

48. In fevers not of the intermittent type, if the external parts be cold, but the internal be burnt up, and if there be a thirst, it is a mortal symptom.

49. If a fever not of the intermittent type, if a lip, an eye-brow, an eye, or the nose, be distorted; or if there be loss of sight or of hearing, and the patient be in a weak state—whatever of these symptoms occur, death is at hand.

50. Apostemes in fevers which are not resolved at the first crisis, indicate a protracted disease.

51. When in a fever not of the intermittent type dyspnœa and delirium come on, the case is mortal.

52. When persons in fevers, or in other illnesses, shed tears voluntarily, it is nothing out of place; but when they shed tears involuntarily, it is more so.

53. In whatever cases of fever very viscid concentrations form about the teeth, the fevers turn out to be particularly strong.

54. In whatever case of ardent fever dry coughs of a tickling nature with slight expectoration are long protracted, there is usually not much thirst.

55. All fevers complicated with buboes are bad, except ephemerals.

56. Sweat supervening in a case of fever without the fever ceasing, is bad, for the disease is protracted, and it indicates more copious humors.

57. Fever supervening in a case of confirmed spasm, or of tetanus, removes the disease.

58. A rigor supervening in a case of ardent fever, produces resolution of it.

59. A true tertian comes to a crisis in seven periods at furthest.

60. When in fevers there is deafness, if blood run from the nostrils, or the bowels become disordered, it carries off the disease.

61. In a febrile complaint, if the fever do not leave on the odd days, it relapses.

62. When jaundice supervenes in fevers before the seventh day, it is a bad symptom, unless there be watery discharges from the bowels.

63. In whatever cases of fever rigors occur during the day, the fevers come to a resolution during the day.

64. When in cases of fever jaundice occurs on the seventh, the ninth, the eleventh, or the fourteenth day, it is a good symptom, provided the hypochondriac region be not hard.  Otherwise it is not a good symptom.

65. A strong heat about the stomach and cardialgia are bad symptoms in fevers.

66. In acute fevers, spasms, and strong pains about the bowels are bad symptoms.

67. In fevers, frights after sleep, or convulsions, are a bad symptom.

68. In fevers, a stoppage of the respiration is a bad symptom, for it indicates convulsions.

69. When the urine is thick, grumoss, and scanty in cases not free from fever a copious discharge of thinner urine proves beneficial.  Such a discharge more commonly takes place when the urine has had a sediment from the first, or soon after the commencement.

70. When in fevers the urine is turbid, like that of a beast of burden, in such a case there either is or will be headache.

71. In cases which come to a crisis on the seventh day, the urine has a red nubecula on the fourth day, and the other symptoms accordingly.

72. When the urine is transparent and white, it is bad; it appears principally in cases of phrenitis.

73. When the hypochondriac region is affected with meteorism and borborygmi, should pain of the loins supervene, the bowels get into a loose and watery state, unless there be an eruption of flatus or a copious evacuation of urine.  These things occur in fevers.

74. When there is reason to expect that an abscess will form in joints, the abscess is carried off by a copious discharge of urine, which is thick, and becomes white, like what begins to form in certain cases of quartan fever, attended with a sense of lassitude.  It is also speedily carried off by a hemorrhage from the nose.

75. Blood or pus in the urine indicates ulceration either of the kidneys or of the bladder.

76. When small fleshy substances like hairs are discharged along with thick urine, these substances come from the kidneys.

77. In those cases where there are furfuraceous particles discharged along with thick urine, there is scabies of the bladder.

78. In those cases where there is a spontaneous discharge of bloody urine, it indicates rupture of a small vein in the kidneys.

79. In those cases where there is a sandy sediment in the urine, there is calculus in the bladder (or kidneys).

80. If a patient pass blood and clots in his urine, and have strangury, and if a pain seize the hypogastric region and perineum, the parts about the bladder are affected.

81. If a patient pass blood, pus, and scales, in the urine, and if it have a heavy smell, ulceration of the bladder is indicated.

82. When tubercles form in the urethra, if these suppurate and burst, there is relief.

83. When much urine is passed during the night, it indicates that the alvine evacuations are scanty.


--- Section 5 ---
1. A spasm from taking hellebore is of a fatal nature.

2. Spasm supervening on a wound is fatal.

3. A convulsion, or hiccup, supervening on a copious discharge of blood is bad.

4. A convulsion, or hiccup, supervening upon hypercatharsis is bad.

5. If a drunken person suddenly lose his speech, he will die convulsed, unless fever come on, or he recover his speech at the time when the consequences of a debauch pass off.

6. Such persons as are seized with tetanus die within four days, or if they pass these they recover.

7. Those cases of epilepsy which come on before puberty may undergo a change; but those which come on after twenty-five years of age, for the most part terminate in death.

8. In pleuritic affections, when the disease is not purged off in fourteen days, it usually terminates in empyema.

9. Phthisis most commonly occurs between the ages of eighteen and thirty-five years.

10. Persons who escape an attack of quinsy, and when the disease is turned upon the lungs, die in seven days; or if they pass these they become affected with empyema.

11. In persons affected with phthisis, if the sputa which they cough up have a heavy smell when poured upon coals, and if the hairs of the head fall off, the case will prove fatal.

12. Phthisical persons, the hairs of whose head fall off, die if diarrhoea set in.

13. In persons who cough up frothy blood, the discharge of it comes from the lungs.

14. Diarrhoea attacking a person affected with phthisis is a mortal symptom.

15. Persons who become affected with empyema after pleurisy, if they get clear of it in forty days from the breaking of it, escape the disease; but if not, it passes into phthisis.

16. Heat produces the following bad effects on those who use it frequently: enervation of the fleshy parts, impotence of the nerves, torpor of the understanding, hemorrhages, deliquia, and, along with these, death.

17. Cold induces convulsions, tetanus, mortification, and febrile rigors.

18. Cold is inimical to the bones, the teeth, the nerves, the brain, and the spinal marrow, but heat is beneficial.

19. Such parts as have been congealed should be heated, except where there either is a hemorrhage, or one is expected.

20. Cold pinches ulcers, hardens the skin, occasions pain which does not end in suppuration, blackens, produces febrile rigors, convulsions, and tetanus.

21. In the case of a muscular youth having tetanus without a wound, during the midst of summer, it sometimes happens that the allusion of a large quantity of cold water recalls the heat. Heat relieves these diseases.

22. Heat is suppurative, but not in all kinds of sores, but when it is, it furnishes the greatest test of their being free from danger. It softens the skin, makes it thin, removes pain, soothes rigor, convulsions, and tetanus. It removes affections of the head, and heaviness of it. It is particularly efficacious in fractures of the bones, especially of those which have been exposed, and most especially in wounds of the head, and in mortifications and ulcers from cold; in herpes exedens, of the anus, the privy parts, the womb, the bladder, in all these cases heat is agreeable, and brings matters to a crisis; but cold is prejudicial, and does mischief.

23. Cold water is to be applied in the following cases; when there is a hemorrhage, or when it is expected, but not applied to the spot, but around the spot whence the blood flows; and in inflammations and inflammatory affections, inclining to a red and subsaguineous color, and consisting of fresh blood, in these cases it is to be applied but it occasions mortification in old cases; and in erysipelas not attended with ulceration, as it proves injurious to erysipelas when ulcerated.

24. Cold things, such as snow and ice, are inimical to the chest, being provocative of coughs, of discharges of blood, and of catarrhs.

25. Swellings and pains in the joints, ulceration, those of a gouty nature, and sprains, are generally improved by a copious affusion of cold water, which reduces the swelling, and removes the pain; for a moderate degree of numbness removes pain.

26. The lightest water is that which is quickly heated and quickly cooled.

27. When persons have intense thirst, it is a good thing if they can sleep off the desire of drinking.

28. Fumigation with aromatics promotes menstruation, and would be useful in many other cases, if it did not occasion heaviness of the head.

29. Women in a state of pregnancy may be purged, if there be any urgent necessity (or, if the humors be in a state of orgasm?), from the fourth to the seventh month, but less so in the latter case. In the first and last periods it must be avoided.

30. It proves fatal to a woman in a state of pregnancy, if she be seized with any of the acute diseases.

31. If a woman with child be bled, she will have an abortion, and this will be the more likely to happen, the larger the foetus.

32. Haemoptysis in a woman is removed by an eruption of the menses.

33. In a woman when there is a stoppage the menses, a discharge of blood from the nose is good.

34. When a pregnant woman has a violent diarrhoea, there is danger of her miscarrying.

35. Sneezing occurring to a woman affected with hysterics, and in difficult labor, is a good symptom.

36. When the menstrual discharge is of a bad color and irregular, it indicates that the woman stands in need of purging.

37. In a pregnant woman, if the breasts suddenly lose their fullness, she has a miscarriage.

38. If, in a woman pregnant with twins, either of her breasts lose its fullness, she will part with one of her children; and if it be the right breast which becomes slender, it will be the male child, or if the left, the female.

39. If a woman who is not with child, nor has brought forth, have milk, her menses are obstructed.

40. In women, blood collected in the breasts indicates madness.

41. If you wish to ascertain if a woman be with child, give her hydromel to drink when she is going to sleep, and has not taken supper, and if she be seized with tormina in the belly, she is with child, but otherwise she is not pregnant.

42.  A woman with child, if it be a male, has a good color, but if a female, she has a bad color.

43. If erysipelas of the womb seize a woman with child, it will probably prove fatal.

44. Women who are very lean, have miscarriages when they prove with child, until they get into better condition.

45. When women, in a moderate condition of body, miscarry in the second or third month, without any obvious cause, their cotyledones are filled with mucosity, and cannot support the weight of the foetus, but are broken asunder.

46. Such women as are immoderately fat, and do not prove with child, in them it is because the epiploon (fat?) blocks up the mouth of the womb, and until it be reduced, they do not conceive.

47. If the portion of the uterus seated near the hip-joint suppurate, it gets into a state requiring to be treated with tents.

48. The male foetus is usually seated in the right, and the female in the left side.

49. To procure the expulsion of the secundines, apply a sternutatory, and shut the nostrils and mouth.

50. If you wish to stop the menses in a woman, apply as large a cupping instrument as possible to the breasts.

51. When women are with child, the mouth of their womb is closed.

52. If in a woman with child, much milk flow from the breasts, it indicates that the foetus is weak; but if the breasts be firm, it indicates that the foetus is in a more healthy state.

53. In women that are about to miscarry, the breasts become slender; but if again they become hard, there will be pain, either in the breasts, or in the hip-joints, or in the eyes, or in the knees, and they will not miscarry.

54. When the mouth of the uterus is hard, it is also necessarily shut.

55. Women with child who are seized with fevers, and who are greatly emaciated, without any (other?) obvious cause, have difficult and dangerous labors, and if they miscarry, they are in danger.

56. In the female flux (immoderate menstruation?), if convulsion and deliquium come on, it is bad.

57. When the menses are excessive, diseases take place, and when the menses are stopped, diseases from the uterus take place.

58. Strangury supervenes upon inflammation of the rectum, and of the womb, and strangury supervenes upon suppuration of the kidney, and hiccup upon inflammation of the liver.

59. If a woman do not conceive, and wish to ascertain whether she can conceive, having wrapped her up in blankets, fumigate below, and if it appear that the scent passes through the body to the nostrils and mouth, know that of herself she is not unfruitful.

60. If woman with a child have her courses, it is impossible that the child can be healthy.

61. If a woman's courses be suppressed, and neither rigor nor fever has followed, but she has been affected with nausea, you may reckon her to be with child.

62. Women who have the uterus cold and dense (compact?) do not conceive; and those also who have the uterus humid, do not conceive, for the semen is extinguished, and in women whose uterus is very dry, and very hot, the semen is lost from the want of food; but women whose uterus is in an intermediate state between these temperaments prove fertile.

63. And in like manner with respect to males; for either, owing to the laxity of the body, the pneuma is dissipated outwardly, so as not to propel the semen, or, owing to its density, the fluid (semen?) does not pass outwardly; or, owing to coldness, it is not heated so as to collect in its proper place (seminal vessels?), or, owing to its heat, the very same thing happens.

64. It is a bad thing to give milk to persons having headache, and it is also bad to give it in fevers, and to persons whose hypochondria are swelled up, and troubled with borborygmi, and to thirsty persons; it is bad also, when given to those who have bilious discharges in acute fevers, and to those who have copious discharges of blood; but it is suitable in phthisical cases, when not attended with very much fever; it is also to be given in fevers of a chronic and weak nature, when none of the aforementioned symptoms are present, and the patients are excessively emaciated.

65. When swellings appear on wounds, such cases are not likely to be attacked either with convulsions, or delirium, but when these disappear suddenly, if situated behind, spasms and tetanus supervene, and if before, mania, acute pains of the sides, or suppurations, or dysentery, if the swellings be rather red.

66. When no swelling appears on severe and bad wounds, it is a great evil.

67. In such cases, the soft are favorable; and crude, unfavorable.

68. When a person is pained in the back part of the head, he is benefited by having the straight vein in the forehead opened.

69. Rigors commence in women, especially at the loins, and spread by the back to the head; and in men also, rather in the posterior than the anterior side of the body, as from the arms and thighs; the skin there is rare, as is obvious from the growth of hair on them.

70. Persons attacked with quartans are not readily attacked with convulsions, or if previously attacked with convulsions, they cease if a quartan supervene.

71. In those persons in whom the skin is stretched, and parched and hard, the disease terminates without sweats; but in those in whom the skin is loose and rare, it terminates with sweats.

72. Persons disposed to jaundice are not very subject to flatulence.


--- Section 6 ---
1. In cases of chronic lientery, acid eructations supervening when there were none previously, is a good symptom.

2. Persons whose noses are naturally watery, and their seed watery, have rather a deranged state of health; but those in the opposite state, a more favorable.

3. In protracted cases of dysentery, loathing of food is a bad symptom, and still worse, if along with fever.

4. Ulcers, attended with a falling off of the hair, are mali moris.

5. It deserves to be considered whether the pains in the sides, and in the breasts, and in the other parts, differ much from one another.

6. Diseases about the kidneys and bladder are cured with difficulty in old men.

7. Pains occurring about the stomach, the more superficial they are, the more slight are they; and the less superficial, the more severe.

8. In dropsical persons, ulcers forming on the body are not easily healed.

9. Broad exanthemata are not very itchy.

10. In a person having a painful spot in the head, with intense cephalalgia, pus or water running from the nose, or by the mouth, or at the ears, removes the disease.

11. Hemorrhoids appearing in melancholic and nephritic affections are favorable.

12. When a person has been cured of chronic hemorrhoids, unless one be left, there is danger of dropsy or phthisis supervening.

13. Sneezing coming on, in the case of a person afflicted with hiccup, removes the hiccup.

14. In a case of dropsy, when the water runs by the veins into the belly, it removes the disease.

15. In confirmed diarrhoea, vomiting, when it comes on spontaneously, removes the diarrhoea.

16. A diarrhoea supervening in a confirmed case of pleurisy or pneumonia is bad.

17. It is a good thing in ophthalmy for the patient to be seized with diarrhoea.

18. A severe wound of the bladder, of the brain, of the heart, of the diaphragm, of the small intestines, of the stomach, and of the liver, is deadly.

19. When a bone, cartilage, nerve, the slender part of the jaw, or prepuce, are cut out, the part is neither restored, nor does it unite.

20. If blood be poured out preternaturally into a cavity, it must necessarily become corrupted.

21. In maniacal affections, if varices or hemorrhoids come on, they remove the mania.

22. Those ruptures in the back which spread down to the elbows are removed by venesection.

23. If a fright or despondency lasts for a long time, it is a melancholic affection.

24. If any of the intestines be transfixed, it does not unite.

25. It is not a good sign for an erysipelas spreading outwardly to be determined inward; but for it to be determined outward from within is good.

26. In whatever cases of ardent fever tremors occur, they are carried off by a delirium.

27. Those cases of empyema or dropsy which are treated by incision or the cautery, if the water or pus flow rapidly all at once, certainly prove fatal.

28. Eunuchs do not take the gout, nor become bald.

29. A woman does not take the gout, unless her menses be stopped.

30. A young man does not take the gout until he indulges in coition.

31. Pains of the eyes are removed by drinking pure wine, or the bath, or a fomentation, or venesection, or purging.

32. Persons whose speech has become impaired are likely to be seized with chronic diarrhoea.

33. Persons having acid eructations are not very apt to be seized with pleurisy.

34. Persons who have become bald are not subject to large varices; but should varices supervene upon persons who are bald, their hair again grows thick.

35. Hiccup supervening in dropsical cases is bad.

36. Venesection cures dysuria; open the internal veins of the arm.

37. It is a good symptom when swelling on the outside of the neck seizes a person very ill of quinsy, for the disease is turned outwardly.

38. It is better not to apply any treatment in cases of occult cancer; for, if treated, the patients die quickly; but if not treated, they hold out for a long time.

39. Convulsions take place either from repletion or depletion; and so it is with hiccup.

40. When pains, without inflammation, occur about the hypochondria, in such cases, fever supervening removes the pain.

41. When pus formed anywhere in the body does not point, this is owing to the thickness of the part.

42. In cases of jaundice, it is a bad symptom when the liver becomes indurated.

43. When persons having large spleens are seized with dysentery, and if the dysentery pass into a chronic state, either dropsy or lientery supervenes, and they die.

44. When ileus comes on in a case of strangury, they prove fatal in seven days, unless, fever supervening, there be a copious discharge of urine.

45. When ulcers continue open for a year or upward, there must necessarily be exfoliation of bone, and the cicatrices are hollow.

46. Such persons as become hump-backed from asthma or cough before puberty, die.

47. Persons who are benefited by venesection or purging, should be bled or purged in spring.

48. In enlargement of the spleen, it is a good symptom when dysentery comes on.

49. In gouty affections, the inflammation subsides in the course of forty days.

50. When the brain is severely wounded, fever and vomiting of bile necessarily supervene.

51. When persons in good health are suddenly seized with pains in the head, and straightway are laid down speechless, and breathe with stertor, they die in seven days, unless fever come on.

52. We must attend to the appearances of the eyes in sleep, as presented from below; for if a portion of the white be seen between the closed eyelids, and if this be not connected with diarrhaea or severe purging, it is a very bad and mortal symptom.

53. Delirium attended with laughter is less dangerous than delirium attended with a serious mood.

54. In acute diseases, complicated with fever, a moaning respiration is bad.

55. For the most part, gouty affections rankle in spring and in autumn.

56. In melancholic affections, determinations of the humor which occasions them produce the following diseases; either apoplexy of the whole body, or convulsion, or madness, or blindness.

57. Persons are most subject to apoplexy between the ages of forty and sixty.

58. If the omentum protrude, it necessarily mortifies and drops off.

59. In chronic diseases of the hip-joint, if the bone protrude and return again into its socket, there is mucosity in the place.

60. In persons affected with chronic disease of the hip-joint, if the bone protrude from its socket, the limb becomes wasted and maimed, unless the part be cauterized.


--- Section 7 ---
1. In acute diseases, coldness of the extremities is bad.

2. Livid flesh on a diseased bone is bad.

3. Hiccup and redness of the eyes, when they supervene on vomiting, are bad.

4. A chill supervening on a sweat is not good.

5. Dysentery, or dropsy, or ecstacy coming on madness is good.

6. In a very protracted disease, loss of appetite and unmixed discharges from the bowels are bad symptoms.

7. A rigor and delirium from excessive drinking are bad.

8. From the rupture of an internal abscess, prostration of strength, vomiting, and deliquium animi result.

9. Delirium or convulsion from a flow of blood is bad.

10. Vomiting, or hiccup, or convulsion, or delirium, in ileus, is bad.

11. Pneumonia coming on pleurisy is bad.

12. Phrenitis along with pneumonia is bad.

13. Convulsion or tetanus, coming upon severe burning, is bad.

14. Stupor or delirium from a blow on the head is bad.

15. From a spitting of blood there is a spitting of pus.

16. From spitting of pus arise phthisis and a flux; and when the sputa are stopped, they die.

17. Hiccup in inflammation of the liver bad.

18. Convulsion or delirium supervening upon insomnolency is bad.

18a. Trembling upon lethargus is bad.

19. Erysipelas upon exposure of a bone (is bad?).

20. Mortification or suppuration upon erysipelas is bad.

21. Hemorrhage upon a strong pulsation in wounds is bad.

22. Suppuration upon a protracted pain of the parts about the bowels is bad.

23. Dysentery upon unmixed alvine discharges is bad.

24. Delirium upon division of the cranium, if it penetrate into the cavity of the head, is bad.

25. Convulsion upon severe purging is mortal.

26. Upon severe pain of the parts about the bowels, coldness of the extremities coming on is bad.

27. Tenesmus coming on in a case of pregnancy causes abortion.

28. Whatever piece of bone, cartilage, or nerve (tendon?) is cut off, it neither grows nor unites.

29. When strong diarrhoea supervenes in a case of leucophlegmatia, it removes the disease.

30. In those cases in which frothy discharges occur in diarrhoea there are defluxions from the head.

31. When there is a farinaceous sediment in the urine during fever, it indicates a protracted illness.

32. In those cases in which the urine is thin at first, and the sediments become bilious, an acute disease is indicated.

33. In those cases in which the urine becomes divided there is great disorder in the body.

34. When bubbles settle on the surface of the urine, they indicate disease of the kidneys, and that the complaint will be protracted.

35. When the scum on the surface is fatty and copious, it indicates acute diseases of the kidneys.

36. Whenever the aforementioned symptoms occur in nephritic diseases, and along with them acute pains about the muscles of the back, provided these be seated about the external parts, you may expect that there will be an abscess; but if the pains be rather about the internal parts, you may also rather expect that the abscess will be seated internally.

37. Haematemesis, without fever, does not prove fatal, but with fever it is bad; it is to be treated with refrigerant and styptic things.

38. Defluxions into the cavity of the chest suppurate in twenty days.

39. When a patient passes blood and clots, and is seized with strangury and pain in the perineum and pubes, disease about the bladder is indicated.

40. If the tongue suddenly lose its powers, or a part of the body become apoplectic, the affection is of a melancholic nature.

41. In hypercatharsis, of old persons, hiccup supervening is not a good symptom.

42. In a fever, is not of a bilious nature, a copious allusion of hot water upon the head removes the fever.

43. A woman does not become ambidexterous.

44. When empyema is treated either by the cautery or incision, if pure and white pus flow from the wound, the patients recover; but if mixed with blood, slimy and fetid, they die.

45. When abscess of the liver is treated by the cautery or incision, if the pus which is discharged be pure and white, the patients recover, (for in this case it is situated in the coats of the liver;) but if it resemble the lees of oil as it flows, they die.

46. Pains of the eyes are removed by drinking undiluted wine, plenteous bathing with hot water, and venesection.

47. If a dropsical patient be seized with hiccup the case is hopeless.

48. Strangury and dysuria are cured by drinking pure wine, and venesection; open the vein on the inside.

49. It is a good sign when swelling and redness on the breast seize a person very ill of quinsy, for in this case the disease is diverted outwardly.

50. When the brain is attacked with sphacelus, the patients die in three days; or if they escape these, they recover.

51. Sneezing arises from the head, owing to the brain being heated, or the cavity (ventricle) in the head being filled with humors; the air confined in it then is discharged, and makes a noise, because it comes through a narrow passage.

52. Fever supervening on painful affections of the liver removes the pain.

53. Those persons to whom it is beneficial to have blood taken from their veins, should have it done in spring.

54. In those cases where phlegm is collected between the diaphragm and the stomach, and occasions pain, as not finding a passage into either of the cavities, the disease will be carried off if the phlegm be diverted to the bladder by the veins.

55. When the liver is filled with water and bursts into the epiploon, in this case the belly is filled with water and the patient dies.

56. Anxiety, yawning, rigor,-wine drunk with an equal proportion of water, removes these complaints.

57. When tubercles (phymata) form in the urethra, if they suppurate and burst, the pain is carried off.

58. In cases of concussion of the brain produced by any cause, the patients necessarily lose their speech.

59. In a person affected with fever, when there is no swelling in the fauces, should suffocation suddenly come on, and the patient not be able to swallow, except with difficulty, it is a mortal symptom.

59a. In the case of a person oppressed by fever, if the neck be turned aside, and the patient cannot swallow, while there is no swelling in the neck, it is a mortal sign.

60. Fasting should be prescribed the those persons who have humid flesh; for fasting dries bodies.

61. When there are changes in the whole body, and the body becomes sometimes cold and sometimes hot, and the color changes, a protracted disease is indicated.

62. A copious sweat, hot or cold, constantly flowing, indicates a superabundance of humidity; we must evacuate then, in a strong person upward, and in a weak, downward.

63. Fevers, not of the intermittent type, if they become exacerbated every third day are dangerous; but if they intermit in any form whatever, this shows that they are not dangerous.

64. In cases of protracted fever, either chronic abscesses or pains in the joints come on.

65. When chronic abscesses (phymata) or pains in the joints take place after fevers, the patients are using too much food.

66. If one give to a person in fever the same food which is given to a person in good health, what is strength to the one is disease to the other.

67. We must look to the urinary evacuations, whether they resemble those of persons in health; if not at all so, they are particularly morbid, but if they are like those of healthy persons, they are not at all morbid.

68. When the dejections are allowed to stand and not shaken, and a sediment is formed like scrapings (of the bowels), in such a case it is proper to purge the bowels; and if you give ptisans before purging, the more you give the more harm you will do.

69. Crude dejections are the product of black bile; if abundant, of more copious, and if deficient, of less copious collections of it.

70. The sputa in fevers, not of an intermittent type, which are livid, streaked with blood, and fetid, are all bad, it is favorable when this evacuation, like the urinary and alvine, passes freely; and whenever any discharge is suppressed and not purged off it is bad.

71. When you wish to purge the body, you must bring it into a state favorable to evacuations; and if you wish to dispose it to evacuations upward, you must bind the belly; and if you wish to dispose it to evacuations downward, you must moisten the belly.

72. Sleep and watchfulness, both of them, when immoderate, constitute disease.

73. In fevers which do not intermit, if the external parts be cold, and the internal burning hot, and fever prevail, it is a mortal sign.

74. In a fever which does not intermit, if a lip, the nose, or an eye be distorted, if the patient lose his sense of sight or of hearing, while now in a weak state,-whatever of these symptoms occurs it is mortal.

75. Upon leucophlegmatia dropsy supervenes.

76. Upon diarrhoea dysentery.

77. Upon dysentery lientery.

78. Upon sphacelus exfoliation of the bone.

79 and 80. Upon vomiting of blood consumption, and a purging of pus upward; upon consumption a defluxion from the head; upon a defluxion diarrhoea; upon diarrhoea a stoppage of the purging upward; upon the stoppage of it death.

81. In the discharges by the bladder, the belly, and the flesh (the skin?) if the body has departed slightly from its natural condition, the disease is slight; if much, it is great; if very much, it is mortal.

82. Persons above forty years of age who are affected with frenzy, do not readily recover; the danger is less when the disease is cognate to the constitution and age.

83. In whatever diseases the eyes weep voluntarily, it is a good symptom, but when involuntarily, it is a bad.

84. When in quartan fevers blood flows from the nostrils it is a bad symptom.

85. Sweats are dangerous when they do not occur on critical days, when they are strong, and quickly forced out of the forehead, either in the form of drops or in streams, and if excessively cold and copious; for such a sweat must proceed from violence, excess of pain, and prolonged squeezing (affliction?).

86. In a chronic disease an excessive flux from the bowels is bad.

87. Those diseases which medicines do not cure, iron (the knife?) cures; those which iron cannot cure, fire cures; and those which fire cannot cure, are to be reckoned wholly incurable.


────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────

On Airs, Waters, and Places (论气候、水与地域)
译者：Francis Adams
来源：英文维基文库 (en.wikisource.org)
URL: https://en.wikisource.org/wiki/On_Airs%2C_Waters%2C_Places?action=raw

────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────

--- Part I ---
Whoever wishes to investigate medicine properly, should proceed thus:  in the first place to consider the seasons of the year, and what effects each of them produces for they are not at all alike, but differ much from themselves in regard to their changes.  Then the winds, the hot and the cold, especially such as are common to all countries, and then such as are peculiar to each locality.  We must also consider the qualities of the waters, for as they differ from one another in taste and weight, so also do they differ much in their qualities.  In the same manner, when one comes into a city to which he is a stranger, he ought to consider its situation, how it lies as to the winds and the rising of the sun; for its influence is not the same whether it lies to the north or the south, to the rising or to the setting sun.  These things one ought to consider most attentively, and concerning the waters which the inhabitants use, wheteher they be marshy and soft, or hard, and running from elevated and rocky situations, and then if saltish and unfit for cooking; and the ground, whether it be naked and deficient in water, or wooded and well watered, and whether it lies in a hollow, confined situation, or is elevated and cold; and the mode in which the inhabitants live, and what are their pursuits, whether they are fond of drinking and eating to excess, and given to indolence, or are fond of exercise and labor, and not given to excess in eating and drinking.


--- Part II ---
From these things he must proceed to investigate everything else.  For if one knows all these things well, or at least the greater part of them, he cannot miss knowing, when he comes into a strange city, either the diseases peculiar to the place, or the particular nature of common diseases, so that he will not be in doubt as to the treatment of the diseases, or commit mistakes, as is likely to be the case provided one had not previously considered these matters.  And in particular, as the season and the year advances, he can tell what epidemic diseases will attack the city, either in summer or in winter, and what each individual will be in danger of experiencing from the change of regimen.  For knowing the changes of the seasons, the risings and settings of the stars, how each of them takes place, he will be able to know beforehand what sort of a year is going to ensue.  Having made these investigations, and knowing beforehand the seasons, such a one must be acquainted with each particular, and must succeed in the preservation of health, and be by no means unsuccessful in the practice of his art.  And if it shall be thought that these things belong rather to meteorlogy, it will be admitted, on second thoughts, that astronomy contributes not a little, but a very great deal, indeed, to medicine.  For with the seasons the digestive organs of men undergo a change.


--- Part III ---
But how each of the aforementioned things should be investigated and explained, I will now declare in a clear manner.  A city that is exposed to hot winds (these are between the wintry rising, and the wintry setting of the sun), and to which these are peculiar, but which is sheltered from the north winds; in such a city the waters will be plenteous and saltish, and as they run from an elevated source, they are necessarily hot in summer, and cold in winter; the heads of the inhabitants are of a humid and pituitous constitution, and their bellies subject to frequent disorders, owing to the phlegm running down from the head; the forms of their bodies, for the most part, are rather flabby; they do not eat nor drink much; drinking wine in particular, and more especially if carried to intoxication, is oppressive to them; and the following diseases are peculiar to the district:  in the first place, the women are sickly and subject to excessive menstruation; then many are unfruitful from disease, and not from nature, and they have frequent miscarriages; infants are subject to attacks of convulsions and asthma, which they consider to be connected with infancy, and hold to be a sacred disease (epilepsy).  The men are subject to attacks of dysentery, diarrhea, hepialus, chronic fevers in winter, of epinyctis, frequently, and of hemorrhoids about the anus.  Pleurisies, peripneumonies, ardent fevers, and whatever diseases are reckoned acute, do not often occur, for such diseases are not apt to prevail where the bowels are loose.  Ophthalmies occur of a humid character, but not of a serious nature, and of short duration, unless they attack epidemically from the change of the seasons.  And when they pass their fiftieth year, defluxions supervening from the brain, render them paralytic when exposed suddenly to strokes of the sun, or to cold.  These diseases are endemic to them, and, moreover, if any epidemic disease connected with the change of the seasons, prevail, they are also liable to it.


--- Part IV ---
But the following is the condition of cities which have the opposite exposure, namely, to cold winds, between the summer settings and the summer risings of the sun, and to which these winds are peculiar, and which are sheltered from the south and the hot breezes.  In the first place the waters are, for the most part, hard and cold.  The men must necessarily be well braced and slender, and they must have the discharges downwards of the alimentary canal hard, and of difficult evacuation, while those upwards are more fluid, and rather bilious than pituitous.  Their heads are sound and hard, and they are liable to burstings (of vessels?) for the most part.  The diseases which prevail epidemically with them, are pleurisies, and those which are called acute diseases.  This must be the case when the bowels are bound; and from any causes, many become affected with suppurations in the lungs, the cause of which is the tension of the body, and hardness of the bowels; for their dryness and the coldness of the water dispose them to ruptures (of vessels?).  Such constitutions must be given to excess of eating, but not of drinking; for it is not possible to be gourmands and drunkards at the same time.  Ophthalmies, too, at length supervene; these being of a hard and violent nature, and soon ending in rupture of the eyes; persons under thirty years of age are liable to severe bleedings at the nose in summer; attacks of epilepsy are rare but severe.  Such people are likely to be rather long-lived; their ulcers are not attended with serious discharges, nor of a malignant character; in disposition they are rather ferocious than gentle.  The diseases I have mentioned are peculiar to the men, and besides they are liable to any common complaint which may be prevailing from the changes of the seasons.  But the women, in the first place, are of a hard constitution, from the waters being hard, indigestible, and cold; and their menstrual discharges are not regular, but in small quantity, and painful.  Then they have difficult parturition, but are not very subject to abortions.  And when they do bring forth children, they are unable to nurse them; for the hardness and indigestable nature of the water puts awasy their milk.  Phthisis frequently supervenes after childbirth, for the efforts of it frequently bring on ruptures and strains.  Children while still little are subject to dropsies in the testicle, which disappear as they grow older; in such a town they are late in attaining manhood.  It is, as I have now stated, with regard to hot and cold winds and cities thus exposed.


--- Part V ---
Cities that are exposed to winds between the summer and the winter risings of the sun, and those the opposite to them, have the following characters:—Those which lie to the rising of the sun are all likely to be more healthy than such as are turned to the North, or those exposed to the hot winds, even if there should not be a furlong between them.  In the first place, both the heat and cold are more moderate.  Then such waters as flow to the rising sun, must necessarily be clear, fragrant, soft, and delightful to drink, in such a city.  For the sun in rising and shining upon them purifies them, by dispelling the vapors which generally prevail in the morning.  The persons of the inhabitants are, for the most part, well colored and blooming, unless some disease counteract.  The inhabitants have clear voices, and in temper and intellect are superior to those which are exposed to the north, and all the productions of the country in like manner are better.  A city so situated resembles the spring as to moderation between heat and cold, and the diseases are few in number, and of a feeble kind, and bear a resemblance to the diseases which prevail in regions exposed to hot winds.  The women there are very prolific, and have easy deliveries.  Thus it is with regard to them.


--- Part VI ---
But such cities as lie to the west, and which are sheltered from winds blowing from the east, and which the hot winds and the cold winds of the north scarcely touch, must necessarily be in a very unhealthy situation:  in the first place the waters are not clear, the cause of which is, because the mist prevails commonly in the morning, and it is mixed up with the water and destroys its clearness, for the sun does not shine upon the water until he be considerably raised above the horizon.  And in summer, cold breezes from the east blow and dews fall; and in the latter part of the day the setting sun particularly scorches the inhabitants, and therefore they are pale and enfeebled, and are partly subject to all the aforesaid diseases, but no one is peculiar to them.  Their voices are rough and hoarse owing to the state of the air, which in such a situation is generally impure and unwholesome, for they have not the northern winds to purify it; and these winds they have are of a very humid character, such being the nature of the evening breezes.  Such a situation of a city bears a great resemblance to autumn as regards the changes of the day, inasmuch as the difference between morning and evening is great.  So it is with regard to the winds that are conducive to health, or the contrary.


--- Part VII ---
And I wish to give an account of the other kinds of waters, namely, of such as are wholesome and such as are unwholesome, and what bad and what good effects may be derived from water; for water contributes much towards health.  Such waters then as are marshy, stagnant, and belong to lakes, are necessarily hot in summer, thick, and have a strong smell, since they have no current; but being constantly supplied by rain-water, and the sun heating them, they necessarily want their proper color, are unwholesome and form bile; in winter, they become congealed, cold, and muddy with the snow and ice, so that they are most apt to engender phlegm, and bring on hoarseness; those who drink them have large and obstructed spleens, their bellies are hard, emaciated, and hot; and their flesh is melted down and taken up by the spleen, and hence they are slender; such persons then are voracious and thirsty; their bellies are very dry both above and below, so that they require the strongest medicines.  This disease is habitual to them both in summer and in winter, and in addition they are vey subject to dropsies of a most fatal character; and in summer dysenteries, diarrheas, and protracted quartan fevers frequently seize them, and these diseases when prolonged dispose such constitutions to dropsies, and thus prove fatal.  These are the diseases which attack them in summer; but in winter younger persons are liable to pneumonia, and maniacal affections; and older persons to ardent fevers, from hardness of the belly.  Women are subject to œdema and leucophlegmasiæ; when pregnant they have difficult deliveries; their infants are large and swelled, and then during nursing they become wasted and sickly, and the lochial discharge after parturition does not proceed properly with the women.  The children are particularly subject to hernia, and adults to varices and ulcers on their legs, so that persons with such constitutions cannot be long-lived, but before the usual period they fall into a state of premature old age.  And further, the women appear to be with child, and when the time of parturition arrives, the fulness of the belly disappears, and this happens from dropsy of the uterus.  Such waters then I reckon bad for every purpose.  The next to them in badness are those which have their fountains in rocks, so that they must necessarily be hard, or come from a soil which produces thermal waters, such as those having iron, copper, silver, gold, sulphur, alum, bitumen, or nitre (soda) in them; for all these are formed by the force of heat.  Good waters cannot proceed from such a soil, but those that are hard and of a heating nature, difficult to pass by urine, and of difficult evacuation by the bowels.  The best are those which flow from elevated grounds, and hills of earth; these are sweet, clear, and can bear a little wine; they are hot in summer and cold in winter, for such necessarily must be the waters from deep wells.  But those are most to be commended which run to the rising of the sun, and especially to the summer sun; for such are necessarily more clear, fragrant, and light.  But all such as are slty, crude, and harsh, are not good for drink.  But there are certain constitutions and diseases with which such waters agree with when drunk, as I will explain presently.  Their characters are as follows:  the best are such as have their fountains to the east; the next, those between the summer risings and settings of the sun, and especially those to the risings; and third, those between the summer and winter settings; but the worst are those to the south, and the parts between the winter rising and setting, and those to the south are very bad, but those to the north are better.  They are to be used as follows:  whoever is in good health and strength need not mind, but may always drink whatever is at hand.  But whoever wishes to drink the most suitable for any disease, may accomplish his purpose by attending to the following directions:  To persons whose bellies are hard and easily burnt up, the sweetest, the lightest, and the most limpid waters will be proper; but those persons whose bellies are soft, loose, and pituitous, should choose the hardest, those kinds that are most crude, and the saltiest, for thus will they be most readily dried up; for such waters as are adapted for boiling, and are of a very solvent nature, naturally loosen readily and melt down the bowels; but such as are intractable, hard, and by no means proper for boiling, these rather bind and dry up the bowels.  People have deceived themselves with regard to salt waters, from inexperience, for they think these waters purgative, whereas they are the very reverse; for such waters are crude, and ill adapted for boiling, so that the belly is more likely to be bound up than loosened by them.  And thus it is with regard to the waters of springs.


--- Part VIII ---
I will now tell how it is with respect to rainwater, and water from snow.  Rain waters, then, are the lightest, the sweetest, the thinnest, and the clearest; for originally the sun raises and attracts the thinnest and lightest part of the water, as is obvious from the nature of salts; for the saltish part is left behind owing to its thickness and weight, and forms salts; but the sun attracts the thinnest part, owing to its lightness, and he abstracts this not only from the lakes, but also from the sea, and from all things which contain humidity, and there is humidity in everything; and from man himself the sun draws off the thinnest and lightest part of the juices.  As a strong proof of this, when a man walks in the sun, or sits down having a garment on, whatever parts of the body the sun shines upon do not sweat, for the sun carries off whatever sweat makes its appearance; but those parts which are covered by the garment, or anything else, sweat, for the particles of sweat are drawn and forced out by the sun, and are preserved by the cover so as not to be dissipated by the sun; but when the person comes into the shade the whole body equally perspires, because the sun no longer shines upon it.  Wherefore, of all kinds of water, these spoil the soonest; and rain water has a bad smell, because its particles are collected and mixed together from most objects, so as to spoil the soonest; and in addition to this, when attracted and raised up, being carried about and mixed with the air, whatever part of it is turbid and darkish is separated and removed from the other, and becomes cloud and mist, but the most attenuated and lightest part is left, and becomes sweet, being heated and concocted by the sun, for all other things when concocted become sweet.  While dissipated then and not in a state of consistence it is carried aloft.  But when collected and condensed by contrary winds, it falls down wherever it happens to be most condensed.  For this is likely to happen when the clouds being carried along and moving with a wind which does not allow them to rest, suddenly encounters another wind and other clouds from the opposite direction:  there it is first condensed, and what is behind is carried up to the spot, and thus it thickens, blackens, and is conglomerated, and by its weight it falls down and becomes rain.  Such, to all appearance, are the best of waters, but they require to be boiled and strained; for otherwise they have a bad smell, and occasion hoarseness and thickness of the voice to those who drink them.  Those from snow and ice are all bad, for when once congealed, they never again recover their former nature; for whatever is clear, light, and sweet in them, is separated and disappears; but the most turbid and weightiest part is left behind.  You may ascertain this in the following manner:  If in winter you will pour water by measure into a vessel and expose it to the open air until it is all frozen, and then on the following day bring it into a warm situation where the ice will thaw, if you measure the water again when dissolved you will find it much less in quantity.  This is a proof that the lightest and thinnest part is dissipated and dried up by the congelation, and not the heaviest and thickest, for that is impossible:  wherefore I hold that waters from snow and ice, and those allied to them, are the worst of any for all purposes whatever.  Such are the characters of rain-water, and those from ice and snow.


--- Part IX ---
Men become affected with the stone, and are seized with diseases of the kidneys, strangury, sciatica, and become ruptured, when they drink all sorts of waters, and those from great rivers into which many streams streams of all sorts flow, and such as are brought from a considerable distance.  For it is impossible that such waters can resemble one another, but one kind is sweet, another saltish and aluminous, and some flow from thermal springs; and these being all mixed up together disagree, and the strongest part always prevails; but the same kind is not always the strongest, but sometimes one and sometimes another, according to the winds, for the north wind imparts strength to this water, and the south to that, and so also with regard to the others.  There must be deposits of mud and sand in the vessels from such waters, and the aforesaid diseases must be engendered by them when drunk, but why not to all I will now explain.  When the bowels are loose and in a healthy state, and when the bladder is not hot, nor the neck of the bladder very contracted, all such persons pass water freely, and no concretion forms in the bladder; but those in whom the belly is hot, the bladder must be in the same condition; and when preternaturally heated, its neck becomes inflamed; and when these things happen, the bladder does not expel the urine, but raises its heat excessively.  And the thinnest part of it is secreted, and the purest part is passed off in the form of urine, but the thickest and most turbid part is condensed and concreted, at first in small quantity, but afterwards in greater; for being rolled about in the urine, whatever is of a thick consistence it assimilates to itself, and thus it increases and becomes indurated.  And when such persons make water, the stone forced down by the urine falls into the neck of the bladder and stops the urine, and occasions intense pain; so that calculous children rub their privy parts and tear at them, as supposing that the obstruction to the urine is situated there.  As a proof that it is as I say, persons affected with calculus have very limpid urine, because the thickest and foulest part remains and is concreted.  Thus it generally is in cases of calculus.  It forms also in children from milk, when it is not wholesome, but very hot and bilious, for it heats the bowels and bladder, so that the urine being also heated undergoes the same change.  And I hold that it is better to give children only the most diluted wine, for such will least burn up and dry the veins.  Calculi do not form so readily in women, for in them the urine is easily expelled; neither do they rub the pudendum with their hands, nor handle the passage like males; for the urethra in women opens direct into the pudenedum, which is not the case with men, neither in them is the urethra so wide, and they drink more than children do.  Thus, or nearly so, is it with regard to them.


--- Part X ---
And respecting the seasons, one may judge whether the year will prove sickly or healthy from the following observations:—If the appearances connected with rising and setting stars be as they should be; if there be rains in autumn; if the winter be mild, neither very tepid nor unseasonably cold, and if in spring the rains be seasonable, and so also in summer, the year is likely to prove healthy.  But if the winter be dry and northerly, and the spring showery and southerly, the summer will necessarily be of a febrile character, and give rise to ophthalmies and dysenteries.  For when suffocating heat sets in all of a sudden, while the earth is moistened by the vernal showers, and by the south wind, the heat is necessarily doubled from the earth, which is thus soaked by rain and heated by a burning sun, while, at the same time, men's bellies are not in an orderly state, nor the brain properly dried; for it is impossible, aftersuch a spring, but that the body and flesh must be loaded with humors, so that very acute fevers will attack all, but especially those of a phlegmatic constitution.  Dysenteries are also likely to occur to women and those of a very humid temperament.  And if at the rising of the Dogstar rain and wintery storms supervene, and if the etesian winds blow, there is reason to hope that these diseases will cease, and that the autumn will be healthy; but if not, it is likely to be a fatal season to children and women, but least of all to old men; and that convalescents will pass into quartans, and from quartans into dropsies; but if the winter be southerly, showery and mild, but the spring northerly, dry, and of a wintry character, in the first place women who happen to be with child, and whose accouchement should take place in spring, are apt to miscarry; and such as bring forth, have feeble and sickly children, so that they either die presently or are tender, feeble, and sickly, if they live.  Such is the case with the women.  The others are subject to dysenteries and dry ophthalmies, and some have catarrhs beginning in the head and descending to the lungs.  Men of a phlegmatic temperament are likely to have dysenteries; and women, also, from the humidity of their nature, the phlegm descending downwards from the brain; those who are bilious, too, have dry ophthalmies from the heat and dryness of their flesh; the aged, too, have catarrhs from their flabbiness and melting of the veins, so that some of them die suddenly and some become paralytic on the right side or the left.  For when, the winter being southerly and the body hot, the blood and veins are not properly constringed; a spring that is northerly, dry, and cold, having come on, the brain when it should have been expanded and purged, by the coryza and hoarseness is then constringed and contracted, so that the summer and the heat occurring suddenly, and a change supervening, these diseases fall out.  And such cities as lie well to the sun and winds, and use good waters, feel these changes less, but such as use marshy and pooly waters, and lie well both as regards the winds and the sun, these all feel it more.  And if the summer be dry, those diseases soon cease, but if rainy, they are protacted; and there is danger of any sore that there is becoming phagedenic from any cuase; and lienteries and dropsies supervene at the conclusion of diseases; for the bowels are not readily dried up.  And if the summer be rainy and southerly, and next the autumn, the winter must, of necessity, be sickly, and ardent fevers are likely to attack those that are phlegmatic, and more elderly than forty years, and pleurisies and peripneumonies those that are bilious.  But if the summer is parched and northerly, but the autumn rainy and southerly, headache and sphacelus of the brain are likely to occur; and in addition hoarseness, coryza, coughs, and in some cases, consumption.  But if the season is northerly and without water, there being no rain, neither after the Dogstar nor Arcturus; this state agrees best with those who are of a humid temperament, and with women; but it is most inimical to the bilious; for they become much parched up, and ophthalmies of a dry nature supervene, fevers both acute and chronic, and in some cases melancholy; for the most humid and watery part of the bile being consumed, the thickest and most acrid portion is left, and of the blood likewise, when these diseases come upon them.  But all these are beneficial to the phlegmatic, for they are thereby dried up, and reach winter not oppressed with humors, but with them dried up.


--- Part XI ---
Whoever studies and observes these things may be able to foresee most of the effects which will result from the changes of the seasons; and one ought to be particularly guarded during the greatest changes of the seasons, and neither willingly give medicines, nor apply the cautery to the belly, nor make incisions there until ten or more days be past.  Now, the greatest and most dangerous are the two solstices, and especially the summer, and also the two equinoxes, but especially the autumnal.  One ought also to be guarded about the rising of the stars, especially of the Dogstar, then of Arcturus, and then the setting of the Pleiades; for diseases are especially apt to prove critical in those days, and some prove fatal, some pass off, and all others change to another form and another constitution.  So it is with regard to them.


--- Part XII ---
I wish to show, respecting Asia and Europe, how, in all respects, they differ from one another, and concerning the figure of the inhabitants, for they are different, and do not at all resemble one another.  To treat of all would be a long story, but I will tell you how I think it is with regard to the greatest and most marked differences.  I say, then, that Asia differs very much from Europe as to the nature of all things, both with regard to the productions of the earth and the inhabitants, for everything is produced much more beautiful and large in Asia; the country is milder, and the dispositions of the inhabitants also are more gentle and affectionate.  The cause of this is the temperature of the seasons, because it lies in the middle of the risings of the sun towards the east, and removed from the cold (and heat), for nothing tends to growth and mildness so much as when the climate has no predominant quality, but a general equality of temperature prevails.  It is not everywhere the same with regard to Asia, but such parts of the country as lie intermediate between the heat and the cold, are the best supplied with fruits and trees, and have the most genial climate, and enjoy the purest waters, both celestial and terrestrial.  For neither are they much burnt up by the heat, nor dried up by the drought and want of rain, nor do they suffer from the cold; since they are well watered from abundant showers and snow, and the fruits of the season, as might be supposed, grow in abundance, both such as are raised from seed that has been sown, and such plants as the earth produces of its own accord, the fruits of which the inhabitants make use of, training them from their wild state and transplanting them to a suitable soil; the cattle also which are reared there are vigorous, particularly prolific, and bring up young of the fairest description; the inhabitants too, are well fed, most beautiful in shape, of large stature, and differ little from one another either as to figure or size; and the country itself, both as regards its constitution and mildness of the seasons, may be said to bear a close resemblance to the spring.  Manly courage, endurance of suffering, laborious enterprise, and high spirit, could not be produced in such a state of things either among the native inhabitants or those of a different country, for there pleasure necessarily reigns.  For this reason, also, the forms of wild beasts there are much varied.  Thus it is, as I think, with the Egyptians and Libyans.


--- Part XIII ---
But concerning those on the right hand of the summer risings of the sun as far as the Palus Mæotis (for this is the boundary of Europe and Asia), it is with them as follows:  The inhabitants there differ far more from one other than those I have treated of above, owing to the differences of the seasons and the nature of the soil.  But with regard to the country itself, matters are the same there as among all other men; for where the seasons undergo the greatest and most rapid changes, there the country is the wildest and most unequal; and you will find the greatest variety of mountains, forests, plains, and meadows; but where the seasons do not change much there the country is the most even; and, if one will consider it, so is it also with regard to the inhabitants; for the nature of some is like to a country covered with trees and well watered; of some, to a thin soil deficient in water; of others, to fenny and marshy places; and of some again, to a plain of bare and parched land.  For the seasons which modify their natural frame of body are varied, and the greater the varieties of them the greater also will be the differences of their shapes.


--- Part XIV ---
I will pass over the smaller differences among the nations, but will now treat of such as are great either from nature, or custom; and, first, concerning the Macrocephali.  There is no other race of men which have heads in the least resembling theirs.  At first, usage was the principal cause of the length of their head, but now nature cooperates with usage.  They think those the most noble who have the longest heads.  It is thus with regard to the usage:  immediately after the child is born, and while its head is still tender, they fashion it with their hands, and constrain it to assume a lengthened shape by applying bandages and other suitable contrivances whereby the spherical form of the head is destroyed, and it is made to increase in length.  Thus, at first, usage operated, so that this constitution was the result of force:  but, in the course of time, it was formed naturally; so that usage had nothing to do with it; for the semen comes from all parts of the body, sound from the sound parts, and unhealthy from the unhealthy parts.  If, then, children with bald heads are born to children with bald heads; and children with blue eyes to parents who have blue eyes; and if the children of parents having distorted eyes squint also for the most part; and if the same may be said of other forms of the body, what is to prevent it from happening that a child with a long head should be produced by a parent having a long head?  But now these things do not happen as they did formerly, for the custom no longer prevails owing to their intercourse with other men.  Thus it appears to me to be with regard to them.


--- Part XV ---
As to the inhabitants of Phasis, their country is fenny, warm, humid, and wooded; copious and severe rains occur there at all seasons; and the life of the inhabitants is spent among the fens; for their dwellings are constructed of wood and reeds, and are erected amidst the waters; they seldom practice wlaking either to the city or the market, but sail about, up and down, in canoes constructed out of single trees, for there are many canals there.  They drink the hot and stagnant waters, both when rendered putrid by the sun, and when swollen with rains.  The Phasis itself is the most stagnant of all rivers, and runs the smoothest; all the fruits which spring there are unwholesome, of feeble and imperfect growth, owing to the redundance of water, and on this account they do not ripen, for much vapor from the waters overspreads the country.  For these reasons the Phasians have shapes different from those of all other men; for they are large in stature, and of a very gross habit of body, so that not a joint nor vein is visible; in color they are sallow, as if affected with jaundice.  Of all men they have the roughest voices, from their breathing an atmosphere which is not clear, but misty and humid; they are naturally rather languid in supporting bodily fatigue.  The seasons undergo but little change either as to heat or cold; their winds for the most part are southerly, with the exception of one peculiar to the country, which sometimes blows strong, is violent and hot, and is called by them the wind cenchron.  The north wind scarcely reaches them, and when it does blow it is weak and gentle.  Thus it is with regard to the different nature and shape of the inhabitants of Asia and Europe.


--- Part XVI ---
And with regard to the pusillanimity and cowardice of the inhabitants, the principal reason the Asiatics are more unwarlike and of gentler disposition that the Europeans is, the nature of the seasons, which do not undergo any great changes either to heat or cold, or the like; for there is neither excitement of the understanding nor any strong change of the body whereby the temper might be ruffled and they be roused to inconsiderate emotion and passion, rather than living as they do always in the same state.  It is changes of all kinds which arouse the understanding of mankind, and do not allow them to get into a torpid condition.  For these reasons, it appears to me, the Asiatic race is feeble, and further, owing to their laws; for monarchy prevails in the greater part of Asia, and where men are not their own masters nor independent, but are the slaves of others, it is not a matter of consideration with them how they may acquire military discipline, but how they may seem not to be warlike, for the dangers are not equally shared, since they must serve as soldiers, perhaps endure fatigue, and die for their masters, far from their children, their wives, and other friends; and whatever noble and manly actions they may perform lead only to the aggrandizement of their masters, whilst the fruits which they reap are dangers and death; and, in addition to all this, the lands of such persons must be laid waste by the enemy and want of culture.


--- Part XVII ---
In Europe there is a Scythian race, called Sauromatae, which inhabits the confines of the Palus Maeotis, and is different from all other races. Their women mount on horseback, use the bow, and throw the javelin from their horses, and fight with their enemies as long as they are virgins; and they do not lay aside their virginity until they kill three of their enemies, nor have any connection with men until they perform the sacrifices according to law. Whoever takes to herself a husband, gives up riding on horseback unless the necessity of a general expedition obliges her. They have no right breast; for while still of a tender age their mothers heat strongly a copper instrument constructed for this very purpose, and apply it to the right breast, which is burnt up, and its development being arrested, all the strength and fullness are determined to the right shoulder and arm.


--- Part XVIII ---
As the other Scythians have a peculiarity of shape, and do not resemble any other, the same observation applies to the Egyptians, only that the latter are oppressed by heat and the former by cold. What is called the Scythian desert is a prairie, rich in meadows, high-lying, and well watered; for the rivers which carry off the water from the plains are large. There live those Scythians which are called Nomades, because they have no houses, but live in wagons. The smallest of these wagons have four wheels, but some have six; they are covered in with felt, and they are constructed in the manner of houses, some having but a single apartment, and some three; they are proof against rain, snow, and winds. The wagons are drawn by yokes of oxen, some of two and others of three, and all without horns, for they have no horns, owing to the cold. In these wagons the women live, but the men are carried about on horses, and the sheep, oxen, and horses accompany them; and they remain on any spot as long as there is provender for their cattle, and when that fails they migrate to some other place. They eat boiled meat, and drink the milk of mares, and also eat hippace, which is cheese prepared from the milk of the mare. Such is their mode of life and their customs.


--- Part XIX ---
In respect of the seasons and figure of body, the Scythian race, like the Egyptian, have a uniformity of resemblance, different from all other nations; they are by no means prolific, and the wild beasts which are indigenous there are small in size and few in number, for the country lies under the Northern Bears, and the Rhiphaean mountains, whence the north wind blows; the sun comes very near to them only when in the summer solstice, and warms them but for a short period, and not strongly; and the winds blowing from the hot regions of the earth do not reach them, or but seldom, and with little force; but the winds from the north always blow, congealed, as they are, by the snow, ice, and much water, for these never leave the mountains, which are thereby rendered uninhabitable. A thick fog covers the plains during the day, and amidst it they live, so that winter may be said to be always present with them; or, if they have summer, it is only for a few days, and the heat is not very strong. Their plains are high-lying and naked, not crowned with mountains, but extending upwards under the Northern Bears. The wild beasts there are not large, but such as can be sheltered underground; for the cold of winter and the barrenness of the country prevent their growth, and because they have no covert nor shelter. The changes of the seasons, too, are not great nor violent, for, in fact, they change gradually; and therefore their figures resemble one another, as they all equally use the same food, and the same clothing summer and winter, respiring a humid and dense atmosphere, and drinking water from snow and ice; neither do they make any laborious exertions, for neither body nor mind is capable of enduring fatigue when the changes of the seasons are not great. For these reasons their shapes are gross and fleshy, with ill-marked joints, of a humid temperament, and deficient in tone: the internal cavities, and especially those of the intestines, are full of humors; for the belly cannot possibly be dry in such a country, with such a constitution and in such a climate; but owing to their fat, and the absence of hairs from their bodies, their shapes resemble one another, the males being all alike, and so also with the women; for the seasons being of a uniform temperature, no corruption or deterioration takes place in the concretion of the semen, unless from some violent cause, or from disease.


--- Part XX ---
II Will give you a strong proof of the humidity of their constitutions. You will find the greater part of the Scythians, and all the Nomades, with marks of the cautery on their shoulders, arms, wrists, breasts, hip-joints, and loins, and that for no other reason but the humidity and flabbiness of their constitution, for they can neither strain with their bows, nor launch the javelin from their shoulder owing to their humidity and atony: but when they are burnt, much of the humidity in their joints is dried up, and they become better braced, better fed, and their joints get into a more suitable condition. They are flabby and squat at first, because, as in Egypt, they are not swathed; and then they pay no attention to horsemanship, so that they may be adepts at it; and because of their sedentary mode of life; for the males, when they cannot be carried about on horseback, sit the most of their time in the wagon, and rarely practise walking, because of their frequent migrations and shiftings of situation; and as to the women, it is amazing how flabby and sluggish they are. The Scythian race are tawny from the cold, and not from the intense heat of the sun, for the whiteness of the skin is parched by the cold, and becomes tawny.


--- Part XXI ---
It is impossible that persons of such a constitution could be prolific, for, with the man, the sexual desires are not strong, owing to the laxity of his constitution, the softness and coldness of his belly, from all which causes it is little likely that a man should be given to venery; and besides, from being jaded by exercise on horseback, the men become weak in their desires. On the part of the men these are the causes; but on that of the women, they are embonpoint and humidity; for the womb cannot take in the semen, nor is the menstrual discharge such as it should be, but scanty and at too long intervals; and the mouth of the womb is shut up by fat and does not admit the semen; and, moreover, they themselves are indolent and fat, and their bellies cold and soft. From these causes the Scythian race is not prolific. Their female servants furnish a strong proof of this; for they no sooner have connection with a man than they prove with child, owing to their active course of life and the slenderness of body.


--- Part XXII ---
And, in addition to these, there are many eunuchs among the Scythians, who perform female work, and speak like women. Such persons are called effeminates. The inhabitants of the country attribute the cause of their impotence to a god, and venerate and worship such persons, every one dreading that the like might befall himself; but to me it appears that such affections are just as much divine as all others are, and that no one disease is either more divine or more human than another, but that all are alike divine, for that each has its own nature, and that no one arises without a natural cause. But I will explain how I think that the affection takes its rise. From continued exercise on horseback they are seized with chronic defluxions in their joints owing to their legs always hanging down below their horses; they afterwards become lame and stiff at the hip-joint, such of them, at least, as are severely attacked with it. They treat themselves in this way: when the disease is commencing, they open the vein behind either ear, and when the blood flows, sleep, from feebleness, seizes them, and afterwards they awaken, some in good health and others not. To me it appears that the semen is altered by this treatment, for there are veins behind the ears which, if cut, induce impotence; now, these veins would appear to me to be cut. Such persons afterwards, when they go in to women and cannot have connection with them, at first do not think much about it, but remain quiet; but when, after making the attempt two, three, or more times, they succeed no better, fancying they have committed some offence against the god whom they blame for the affection, they put on female attire, reproach themselves for effeminacy, play the part of women, and perform the same work as women do. This the rich among the Scythians endure, not the basest, but the most noble and powerful, owing to their riding on horseback; for the poor are less affected, as they do not ride on horses. And yet, if this disease had been more divine than the others, it ought not to have befallen the most noble and the richest of the Scythians alone, but all alike, or rather those who have little, as not being able to pay honors to the gods, if, indeed, they delight in being thus rewarded by men, and grant favors in return; for it is likely that the rich sacrifice more to the gods, and dedicate more votive offerings, inasmuch as they have wealth, and worship the gods; whereas the poor, from want, do less in this way, and, moreover, upbraid the gods for not giving them wealth, so that those who have few possessions were more likely to bear the punishments of these offences than the rich. But, as I formerly said, these affections are divine just as much as others, for each springs from a natural cause, and this disease arises among the Scythians from such a cause as I have stated. But it attacks other men in like manner, for whenever men ride much and very frequently on horseback, then many are affected with rheums in the joints, sciatica, and gout, and they are inept at venery. But these complaints befall the Scythians, and they are the most impotent of men for the aforesaid causes, and because they always wear breeches, and spend the most of their time on horseback, so as not to touch their privy parts with the hands, and from the cold and fatigue they forget the sexual desire, and do not make the attempt until after they have lost their virility. Thus it is with the race of the Scythians.


--- Part XXIII ---
The other races in Europe differ from one another, both as to stature and shape, owing to the changes of the seasons, which are very great and frequent, and because the heat is strong, the winters severe, and there are frequent rains, and again protracted droughts, and winds, from which many and diversified changes are induced. These changes are likely to have an effect upon generation in the coagulation of the semen, as this process cannot be the same in summer as in winter, nor in rainy as in dry weather; wherefore, I think, that the figures of Europeans differ more than those of Asiatics; and they differ very much from one another as to stature in the same city; for vitiations of the semen occur in its coagulation more frequently during frequent changes of the seasons, than where they are alike and equable. And the same may be said of their dispositions, for the wild, and unsociable, and the passionate occur in such a constitution; for frequent excitement of the mind induces wildness, and extinguishes sociableness and mildness of disposition, and therefore I think the inhabitants of Europe more courageous than those of Asia; for a climate which is always the same induces indolence, but a changeable climate, laborious exertions both of body and mind; and from rest and indolence cowardice is engendered, and from laborious exertions and pains, courage. On this account the inhabitants of Europe are than the Asiatics, and also owing to their institutions, because they are not governed by kings like the latter, for where men are governed by kings there they must be very cowardly, as I have stated before; for their souls are enslaved, and they will not willingly, or readily undergo dangers in order to promote the power of another; but those that are free undertake dangers on their own account, and not for the sake of others; they court hazard and go out to meet it, for they themselves bear off the rewards of victory, and thus their institutions contribute not a little to their courage.

Such is the general character of Europe and Asia.


--- Part XXIV ---
And there are in Europe other tribes, differing from one another in stature, shape, and courage: the differences are those I formerly mentioned, and will now explain more clearly. Such as inhabit a country which is mountainous, rugged, elevated, and well watered, and where the changes of the seasons are very great, are likely to have great variety of shapes among them, and to be naturally of an enterprising and warlike disposition; and such persons are apt to have no little of the savage and ferocious in their nature; but such as dwell in places which are low-lying, abounding in meadows and ill ventilated, and who have a larger proportion of hot than of cold winds, and who make use of warm waters- these are not likely to be of large stature nor well proportioned, but are of a broad make, fleshy, and have black hair; and they are rather of a dark than of a light complexion, and are less likely to be phlegmatic than bilious; courage and laborious enterprise are not naturally in them, but may be engendered in them by means of their institutions. And if there be rivers in the country which carry off the stagnant and rain water from it, these may be wholesome and clear; but if there be no rivers, but the inhabitants drink the waters of fountains, and such as are stagnant and marshy, they must necessarily have prominent bellies and enlarged spleens. But such as inhabit a high country, and one that is level, windy, and well-watered, will be large of stature, and like to one another; but their minds will be rather unmanly and gentle. Those who live on thin, ill-watered, and bare soils, and not well attempered in the changes of the seasons, in such a country they are likely to be in their persons rather hard and well braced, rather of a blond than a dark complexion, and in disposition and passions haughty and self-willed. For, where the changes of the seasons are most frequent, and where they differ most from one another, there you will find their forms, dispositions, and nature the most varied. These are the strongest of the natural causes of difference, and next the country in which one lives, and the waters; for, in general, you will find the forms and dispositions of mankind to correspond with the nature of the country; for where the land is fertile, soft, and well-watered, and supplied with waters from very elevated situations, so as to be hot in summer and cold in winter, and where the seasons are fine, there the men are fleshy, have ill-formed joints, and are of a humid temperament; they are not disposed to endure labor, and, for the most part, are base in spirit; indolence and sluggishness are visible in them, and to the arts they are dull, and not clever nor acute. When the country is bare, not fenced, and rugged, blasted by the winter and scorched by the sun, there you may see the hardy, hardy, slender, with well-shaped joints, well-braced, and shaggy; sharp, industry and vigilance accompany such a constitution; in morals and passions they are haughty and opinionative, inclining rather to the fierce than to the mild; and you will find them acute and ingenious as regards the arts, and excelling in military affairs; and likewise all the other productions of the earth corresponding to the earth itself. Thus it is with regard to the most opposite natures and shapes; drawing conclusions from them, you may judge of the rest without any risk of error.


────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────

On Regimen in Acute Diseases (论急性病饮食)
译者：Francis Adams
来源：英文维基文库 (en.wikisource.org)
URL: https://en.wikisource.org/wiki/On_Regimen_in_Acute_Diseases?action=raw

────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────

1. Those who composed what are called "The Cnidian Sentences" have
described accurately what symptoms the sick experience in every
disease, and how certain of them terminate; and in so far a man,
even who is not a physician, might describe them correctly, provided
he put the proper inquiries to the sick themselves what their
complaints are. But those symptoms which the physician ought to know
beforehand without being informed of them by the patient, are, for the
most part, omitted, some in one case and some in others, and certain
symptoms of vital importance for a conjectural judgment. But when,
in addition to the diagnosis, they describe how each complaint
should be treated, in these cases I entertain a still greater
difference of opinion with them respecting the rules they have laid
down; and not only do I not agree with them on this account, but
also because the remedies they use are few in number; for, with the
exception of acute diseases, the only medicines which they give are
drastic purgatives, with whey, and milk at certain times. If,
indeed, these remedies had been good and suitable to the complaints in
which they are recommended, they would have been still more
deserving of recommendation, if, while few in number, they were
sufficient; but this is by no means the case. Those, indeed, who
have remodeled these "Sentences" have treated of the remedies
applicable in each complaint more in a medical fashion. But neither
have the ancients written anything worth regimen, although this be a
great omission. Some of them, indeed, were not ignorant of the many
varieties of each complaint, and their manifold divisions, but when
they wish to tell clearly the numbers (species?) of each disease
they do not write for their species would be almost innumerable if
every symptom experienced by the patients were held to constitute a
disease, and receive a different name.

2. For my part, I approve of paying attention to everything relating
to the art, and that those things which can be done well or properly
should all be done properly; such as can be quickly done should be
done quickly; such as can be neatly done should be done neatly; such
operations as can be performed without pain should be done with the
least possible pain; and that all other things of the like kind should
be done better than they could be managed by the attendants. But I
would more especially commend the physician who, in acute diseases, by
which the bulk of mankind are cut off, conducts the treatment better
than others. Acute diseases are those which the ancients named
pleurisy, pneumonia, phrenitis, lethargy, causus, and the other
diseases allied to these, including the continual fevers. For,
unless when some general form of pestilential disease is epidemic, and
diseases are sporadic and [not] of a similar character, there are more
deaths from these diseases than from all the others taken together.
The vulgar, indeed, do not recognize the difference between such
physicians and their common attendants, and are rather disposed to
commend and censure extraordinary remedies. This, then, is a great
proof that the common people are most incompetent, of themselves, to
form a judgment how such diseases should be treated: since persons who
are not physicians pass for physicians owing most especially to
these diseases, for it is an easy matter to learn the names of those
things which are applicable to persons laboring under such complaints.
For, if one names the juice of ptisan, and such and such a wine, and
hydromel, the vulgar fancy that he prescribes exactly the same
things as the physicians do, both the good and the bad, but in these
matters there is a great difference between them.

3. But it appears to me that those things are more especially
deserving of being consigned to writing which are undetermined by
physicians, notwithstanding that they are of vital importance, and
either do much good or much harm. By undetermined I mean such as
these, wherefore certain physicians, during their whole lives, are
constantly administering unstrained ptisans, and fancy they thus
accomplish the cure properly, whereas others take great pains that the
patient should not swallow a particle of the barley (thinking it would
do much harm), but strain the juice through a cloth before giving
it; others, again, will neither give thick ptisan nor the juice,
some until the seventh day of the disease, and some until after the
crisis. Physicians are not in the practice of mooting such
questions; nor, perhaps, if mooted, would a solution of them be found;
although the whole art is thereby exposed to much censure from the
vulgar, who fancy that there really is no such science as medicine,
since, in acute diseases, practitioners differ so much among
themselves, that those things which one administers as thinking it the
best that can be given, another holds to be bad; and, in this respect,
they might say that the art of medicine resembles augury, since augurs
hold that the same bird (omen) if seen on the left hand is good, but
if on the right bad: and in divination by the inspection of entrails
you will find similar differences; but certain diviners hold the
very opposite of these opinions. I say, then, that this question is
a most excellent one, and allied to very many others, some of the most
vital importance in the Art, for that it can contribute much to the
recovery of the sick, and to the preservation of health in the case of
those who are well; and that it promotes the strength of those who use
gymnastic exercises, and is useful to whatever one may wish to apply
it.

4. Ptisan, then, appears to me to be justly preferred before all the
other preparations from grain in these diseases, and I commend those
who made this choice, for the mucilage of it is smooth, consistent,
pleasant, lubricant, moderately diluent, quenches thirst if this be
required, and has no astringency; gives no trouble nor swells up in
the bowels, for in the boiling it swells up as much as it naturally
can. Those, then, who make use of ptisan in such diseases, should
never for a day allow their vessels to be empty of it, if I may say
so, but should use it and not intermit, unless it be necessary to stop
for a time, in order to administer medicine or a clyster. And to those
who are accustomed to take two meals in the day it is to be given
twice, and to those accustomed to live upon a single meal it is to
be given once at first, and then, if the case permit, it is to be
increased and given twice to them, if they appear to stand in need
of it. At first it will be proper not to give a large quantity nor
very thick, but in proportion to the quantity of food which one has
been accustomed to take, and so as that the veins may not be much
emptied. And, with regard to the augmentation of the dose, if the
disease be of a drier nature than one had supposed, one must not
give more of it, but should give before the draught of ptisan,
either hydromel or wine, in as great quantity as may be proper; and
what is proper in each case will be afterward stated by us. But if the
mouth and the passages from the lungs be in a proper state as to
moisture, the quantity of the draught is to be increased, as a general
rule, for an early and abundant state of moisture indicates an early
crisis, but a late and deficient moisture indicates a slower crisis.
And these things are as I have stated for the most part; but many
other things are omitted which are important to the prognosis, as will
be explained afterwards. And the more that the patient is troubled
with purging, in so much greater quantity is it to be given until
the crisis, and moreover until two days beyond the crisis, in such
cases as it appears to take place on the fifth, seventh, or ninth day,
so as to have respect both for the odd and even day: after this the
draught is to be given early in the day, and the other food in place
is to be given in the evening. These things are proper, for the most
part, to be given to those who, from the first, have used ptisan
containing its whole substance; for the pains in pleuritic
affections immediately cease of their own accord whenever the patients
begin to expectorate anything worth mentioning, and the purgings
become much better, and empyema much more seldom takes place, than
if the patients used a different regimen, and the crises are more
simple, occur earlier, and the cases are less subject to relapses.

5. Ptisans are to be made of the very best barley, and are to be
well boiled, more especially if you do not intend to use them
strained. For, besides the other virtues of ptisan, its lubricant
quality prevents the barley that is swallowed from proving
injurious, for it does not stick nor remain in the region of the
breast; for that which is well boiled is very lubricant, excellent for
quenching thirst, of very easy digestion, and very weak, all which
qualities are wanted. If, then, one do not pay proper attention to the
mode of administering the ptisan, much harm may be done; for when
the food is shut up in the bowels, unless one procure some
evacuation speedily, before administering the draught, the pain, if
present, will be exasperated; and, if not present, it will be
immediately created, and the respiration will become more frequent,
which does mischief, for it dries the lungs, fatigues the
hypochondria, the hypogastrium, and diaphragm. And moreover if,
while the pain of the side persists, and does not yield to warm
fomentations, and the sputa are not brought up, but are viscid and
unconcocted, unless one get the pain resolved, either by loosening the
bowels, or opening a vein, whichever of these may be proper;- if to
persons so circumstanced ptisan be administered, their speedy death
will be the result. For these reasons, and for others of a similar
kind still more, those who use unstrained ptisan die on the seventh
day, or still earlier, some being seized with delirium, and others
dying suffocated with orthopnoee and riles. Such persons the
ancients thought struck, for this reason more especially, that when
dead the affected side was livid, like that of a person who had been
struck. The cause of this is that they die before the pain is
resolved, being seized with difficulty of respiration, and by large
and rapid breathing, as has been already explained, the spittle
becoming thick, acid, and unconcocted, cannot be brought up, but,
being retained in the bronchi of the lungs, produces riles; and,
when it has come to this, death, for the most part, is inevitable; for
the sputa being retained prevent the breath from being drawn in, and
force it speedily out, and thus the two conspire together to aggravate
the sputa being retained renders the respiration frequent, while the
respiration being frequent thickens the sputa, and prevents them
from being evacuated. These symptoms supervene, not only if ptisan
be administered unseasonably, but still more if any other food or
drink worse than ptisan be given.

6. For the most part, then, the results are the same, whether the
patient have used the unstrained ptisan or have used the juice
alone; or even only drink; and sometimes it is necessary to proceed
quite differently. In general, one should do thus: if fever
commences shortly after taking food, and before the bowels have been
evacuated, whether with or without pain, the physician ought to
withhold the draught until he thinks that the food has descended to
the lower part of the belly; and if any pain be present, the patient
should use oxymel, hot if it is winter, and cold if it is summer; and,
if there be much thirst, he should take hydromel and water. Then, if
any pain be present, or any dangerous symptoms make their
appearance, it will be proper to give the draught neither in large
quantity nor thick, but after the seventh day, if the patient be
strong. But if the earlier-taken food has not descended, in the case
of a person who has recently swallowed food, and if he be strong and
in the vigor of life, a clyster should be given, or if he be weaker, a
suppository is to be administered, unless the bowels open properly
of themselves. The time for administering the draught is to be
particularly observed at the commencement and during the whole
illness; when, then, the feet are cold, one should refrain from giving
the ptisan, and more especially abstain from drink; but when the
heat has descended to the feet, one may then give it; and one should
look upon this season as of great consequence in all diseases, and not
least in acute diseases, especially those of a febrile character,
and those of a very dangerous nature. One may first use the juice, and
then the ptisan, attending accurately to the rules formerly laid down.

7. When pain seizes the side, either at the commencement or at a
later stage, it will not be improper to try to dissolve the pain by
hot applications. Of hot applications the most powerful is hot water
in a bottle, or bladder, or in a brazen vessel, or in an earthen
one; but one must first apply something soft to the side, to prevent
pain. A soft large sponge, squeezed out of hot water and applied,
forms a good application; but it should be covered up above, for
thus the heat will remain the longer, and at the same time the vapor
will be prevented from being carried up to the patient's breath,
unless when this is thought of use, for sometimes it is the case.
And further, barley or tares may be infused and boiled in diluted
vinegar, stronger than that it could be drunk, and may then be sewed
into bladders and applied; and one may bran in like manner. Salts or
toasted millet in woolen bags are excellent for forming a dry
fomentation, for the millet is light and soothing. A soft
fomentation like this soothes pains, even such as shoot to the
clavicle. Venesection, however, does not alleviate the pain unless
when it extends to the clavicle. But if the pain be not dissolved by
the fomentations, one ought not to foment for a length of time, for
this dries the lungs and promotes suppuration; but if the pain point
to the clavicle, or if there be a heaviness in the arm, or about the
breast, or above the diaphragm, one should open the inner vein at
the elbow, and not hesitate to abstract a large quantity, until it
become much redder, or instead of being pure red, it turns livid,
for both these states occur. But if the pain be below the diaphragm,
and do not point to the clavicle, we must open the belly either with
black hellebore or peplium, mixing the black hellebore with carrot
or seseli, or cumin, or anise, or any other of the fragrant herbs; and
with the peplium the juice of sulphium (asafoetida), for these
substances, when mixed up together, are of a similar nature. The black
hellebore acts more pleasantly and effectually than the peplium,
while, on the other hand, the peplium expels wind much more
effectually than the black hellebore, and both these stop the pain,
and many other of the laxatives also stop it, but these two are the
most efficacious that I am acquainted with. And the laxatives given in
draughts are beneficial, when not very unpalatable owing to
bitterness, or any other disagreeable taste, or from quantity,
color, or any apprehension. When the patient has drunk the medicine,
one ought to give him to swallow but little less of the ptisan than
what he had been accustomed to; but it is according to rule not to
according to rule not to give any draughts while the medicine is under
operation; but when the purging is stopped then he should take a
smaller draught than what he had been accustomed to, and afterwards go
on increasing it progressively, until the pain cease, provided nothing
else contra-indicate. This is my rule, also, if one would use the
juice of ptisan (for I hold that it is better, on the whole, to
begin with taking the decoction at once, rather than by first emptying
the veins before doing so, or on the third, fourth, fifth, sixth, or
seventh day, provided the disease has not previously come to a
crisis in the course of this time), and similar preparations to
those formerly described are to be made in those cases.

8. Such are the opinions which I entertain respecting the
administering of the ptisan; and, as regards drinks, whichsoever of
those about to be described may be administered, the same directions
are generally applicable. And here I know that physicians are in the
practice of doing the very reverse of what is proper, for they all
wish, at the commencement of diseases, to starve their patients for
two, three, or more days, and then to administer the ptisans and
drinks; and perhaps it appears to them reasonable that, as a great
change has taken place in the body, it should be counteracted by
another great change. Now, indeed, to produce a change is no small
matter, but the change must be effected well and cautiously, and after
the change the administration of food must be conducted still more so.
Those persons, then, would be most injured if the change is not
properly managed, who used unstrained ptisans; they also would
suffer who made use of the juice alone; and so also they would
suffer who took merely drink, but these least of all.

9. One may derive information from the regimen of persons in good
health what things are proper; for if it appear that there is a
great difference whether the diet be so and so, in other respects, but
more especially in the changes, how can it be otherwise in diseases,
and more especially in the most acute? But it is well ascertained that
even a faulty diet of food and drink steadily persevered in, is
safer in the main as regards health than if one suddenly change it
to another. Wherefore, in the case of persons who take two meals in
the day, or of those who take a single meal, sudden changes induce
suffering and weakness; and thus persons who have not been
accustomed to dine, if they shall take dinner, immediately become
weak, have heaviness over their whole body, and become feeble and
languid, and if, in addition, they take supper, they will have acid
eructations, and some will have diarrhoea whose bowels were previously
dry, and not having been accustomed to be twice swelled out with
food and to digest it twice a day, have been loaded beyond their wont.
It is beneficial, in such cases, to counterbalance this change, for
one should sleep after dinner, as if passing the night, and guard
against cold in winter and heat in summer; or, if the person cannot
sleep, he may stroll about slowly, but without making stops, for a
good while, take no supper, or, at all events, eat little, and only
things that are not unwholesome, and still more avoid drink, and
especially water. Such a person will suffer still more if he take
three full meals in the day, and more still if he take more meals; and
yet there are many persons who readily bear to take three full meals
in the day, provided they are so accustomed. And, moreover, those
who have been in the habit of eating twice a day, if they omit dinner,
become feeble and powerless, averse to all work, and have heartburn;
their bowels seem, as it were, to hang loose, their urine is hot and
green, and the excrement is parched; in some the mouth is bitter,
the eyes are hollow, the temples throb, and the extremities are
cold, and the most of those who have thus missed their dinner cannot
eat supper; or, if they do sup, they load their stomach, and pass a
much worse night than if they had previously taken dinner. Since,
then, an unwonted change of diet for half a day produces such
effects upon persons in health, it appears not to be a good thing
either to add or take from. If, then, he who was restricted to a
single meal, contrary to usage, having his veins thus left empty
during a whole day, when he supped according to custom felt heavy,
it is probable that if, because he was uneasy and weak from the want
of dinner, he took a larger supper than wont, he would be still more
oppressed; or if, wanting food for a still greater interval, he
suddenly took a meal after supper, he will feel still greater
oppression. He, then, who, contrary to usage, has had his veins kept
empty by want of food, will find it beneficial to counteract the bad
effects during that day as follows: let him avoid cold, heat, and
exertion, for he could bear all these ill; let him make his supper
considerably less than usual, and not of dry food, but rather
liquid; and let him take some drink, not of a watery character, nor in
smaller quantity than is proportionate to the food, and on the next
day he should take a small dinner, so that, by degrees, he may
return to his former practice. Persons who are bilious in the
stomach bear these changes worst, while those who are pituitous,
upon the whole, bear the want of food best, so that they suffer the
least from being restricted to one meal in the day, contrary to usage.
This, then, is a sufficient proof that the greatest changes as to
those things which regard our constitutions and habits are most
especially concerned in the production of diseases, for it is
impossible to produce unseasonably a great emptying of the vessels
by abstinence, or to administer food while diseases are at their acme,
or when inflammation prevails; nor, on the on the whole, to make a
great change either one way or another with impunity.

10. One might mention many things akin to these respecting the
stomach and bowels, to show how people readily bear such food as
they are accustomed to, even if it is not naturally good, and drink in
like manner, and how they bear unpleasantly such food as they are
not accustomed to, even although not bad, and so in like manner with
drink; and as to the effects of eating much flesh, contrary to
usage, or garlic, or asafoetida, or the stem of the plant which
produces it, or things of a similar kind possessed of strong
properties, one would be less surprised if such things produce pains
in the bowels, but rather when one learned what trouble, swelling,
flatulence, and tormina the cake (maza) will raise in the belly when
eaten by a person not accustomed to it; and how much weight and
distention of the bowels bread will create to a person accustomed to
live upon the maza; and what thirst and sudden fullness will be
occasioned by eating hot bread, owing to its desiccant and
indigestible properties; and what different effects are produced by
fine and coarse bread when eaten contrary to usage, or by the cake
when usually dry, moist, or viscid; and what different effects polenta
produces upon those who are accustomed and those who are
unaccustomed to the use of it; or drinking of wine or drinking of
water, when either custom is suddenly exchanged for the other; or
when, contrary to usage, diluted wine or undiluted has been suddenly
drunk, for the one will create water-brash in the upper part of the
intestinal canal and flatulence in the lower, while the other will
give rise to throbbing of the arteries, heaviness of the head, and
thirst; and white and dark-colored wine, although both strong wines,
if exchanged contrary to usage, will produce very different effects
upon the body, so that one need the less wonder that a sweet and
strong wine, if suddenly exchanged, should have by no means the same
effect.

11. Let us here briefly advert to what may be said on the opposite
side; namely, that a change of diet has occurred in these cases,
without any change in their body, either as to strength, so as to
require an increase of food, or as to weakness, so as to require a
diminution. But the strength of the patient is to be taken into
consideration, and the manner of the disease, and of the
constitution of the man, and the habitual regimen of the patient,
not only as regards food but also drink. Yet one must much less resort
to augmentation, since it is often beneficial to have recourse to
abstraction, when the patient can bear it, until the disease having
reached its acme and has become concocted. But in what cases this must
be done will be afterwards described. One might write many other
things akin to those which have been now said, but there is a better
proof, for it is not akin to the matter on which my discourse has
principally turned, but the subject-matter itself is a most seasonable
proof. For some at the commencement of acute diseases have taken
food on the same day, some on the next day; some have swallowed
whatever has come in their way, and some have taken cyceon. Now all
these things are worse than if one had observed a different regimen;
and yet these mistakes, committed at that time, do much less injury
than if one were to abstain entirely from food for the first two or
three days, and on the fourth or fifth day were to take such food; and
it would be still worse, if one were to observe total abstinence for
all these days, and on the following days were to take such a diet,
before the disease is concocted; for in this way death would be the
consequence to most people, unless the disease were of a very mild
nature. But the mistakes committed at first were not so irremediable
as these, but could be much more easily repaired. This, therefore, I
think a strong proof that such or such a draught need not be
prescribed on the first days to those who will use the same draughts
afterwards. At the bottom, therefore, they do not know, neither
those using unstrained ptisans, that they are hurt by them, when
they begin to swallow them, if they abstain entirely from food for
two, three, or more days; nor do those using the juice know that
they are injured in swallowing them, when they do not commence with
the draught seasonably. But this they guard against, and know that
it does much mischief, if, before the disease be concocted, the
patient swallow unstrained ptisan, when accustomed to use strained.
All these things are strong proofs that physicians do not conduct
the regimen of patients properly, but that in those diseases in
which total abstinence from food should not be enforced on patients
that will be put on the use of ptisans, they do enforce total
abstinence; that in those cases in which there should be no change
made from total abstinence to ptisans, they do make the change; and
that, for the most part, they change from abstinence to ptisans,
exactly at the time when it is often beneficial to proceed from
ptisans almost to total abstinence, if the disease happen to be in the
state of exacerbation. And sometimes crude matters are attracted
from the head, and bilious from the region near the chest, and the
patients are attacked with insomnolency, so that the disease is not
concocted; they become sorrowful, peevish, and delirious; there are
flashes of light in their eyes, and noises in their ears; their
extremities are cold, their urine unconcocted; the sputa thin,
saltish, tinged with an intense color and smell; sweats about the
neck, and anxiety; respiration, interrupted in the expulsion of the
air, frequent and very large; expression of the eyelids dreadful;
dangerous deliquia; tossing of the bed-clothes from the breast; the
hands trembling, and sometimes the lower lip agitated. These symptoms,
appearing at the commencement, are indicative of strong delirium,
and patients so affected generally die, or if they escape, it is
with a deposit, hemorrhage from the nose, or the expectoration of
thick matter, and not otherwise. Neither do I perceive that physicians
are skilled in such things as these; how they ought to know such
diseases as are connected with debility, and which are further
weakened by abstinence from food, and those aggravated by some other
irritation; those by pain, and from the acute nature of the disease,
and what affections and various forms thereof our constitution and
habit engender, although the knowledge or ignorance of such things
brings safety or death to the patient. For it is a great mischief if
to a patient debilitated by pain, and the acute nature of the disease,
one administer drink, or more ptisan, or food, supposing that the
debility proceeds from inanition. It is also disgraceful not to
recognize a patient whose debility is connected with inanition, and to
pinch him in his diet; this mistake, indeed, is attended with some
danger, but much less than the other, and yet it is likely to expose
one to much greater derision, for if another physician, or a private
person, coming in and knowing what has happened, should give to eat or
drink those things which the other had forbidden, the benefit thus
done to the patient would be manifest. Such mistakes of
practitioners are particularly ridiculed by mankind, for the physician
or nonprofessional man thus coming in, seems as it were to resuscitate
the dead. On this subject I will describe elsewhere the symptoms by
which each of them may be recognized.

12. And the following observations are similar to those now made
respecting the bowels. If the whole body rest long, contrary to usage,
it does not immediately recover its strength; but if, after a
protracted repose, it proceed to labor, it will clearly expose its
weakness. So it is with every one part of the body, for the feet
will make a similar display, and any other of the joints, if, being
unaccustomed to labor, they be suddenly brought into action, after a
time. The teeth and the eyes will suffer in like manner, and also
every other part whatever. A couch, also, that is either softer or
harder than one has been accustomed to will create uneasiness, and
sleeping in the open air, contrary to usage, hardens the body. But
it is sufficient merely to state examples of all these cases. If a
person having received a wound in the leg, neither very serious nor
very trifling, and he being neither in a condition very favorable to
its healing nor the contrary, at first betakes himself to bed, in
order to promote the cure, and never raises his leg, it will thus be
much less disposed to inflammation, and be much sooner well, than it
would have been if he had strolled about during the process of
healing; but if upon the fifth or sixth day, or even earlier, he
should get up and attempt to walk, he will suffer much more than
than if he had walked about from the commencement of the cure, and
if he should suddenly make many laborious exertions, he will suffer
much more than if, when the treatment was conducted otherwise, he
had made the same exertions on the same days. In fine, all these
things concur in proving that all great changes, either one way or
another, are hurtful. Wherefore much mischief takes place in the
bowels, if from a state of great inanition more food than is
moderate be administered (and also in the rest of the body, if from
a state of great rest it be hastily brought to greater exertion, it
will be much more injured), or if from the use of much food it be
changed to complete abstinence, and therefore the body in such cases
requires protracted repose, and if, from a state of laborious
exertion, the body suddenly falls into a state of ease and
indolence, in these cases also the bowels would require continued
repose from abundance of food, for otherwise it will induce pain and
heaviness in the whole body.

13. The greater part of my discourse has related to changes, this
way or that. For all purposes it is profitable to know these things,
and more especially respecting the subject under consideration,-
that in acute diseases, in which a change is made to ptisans from a
state of inanition, it should be made as I direct; and then that
ptisans should not be used until the disease be concocted, or some
other symptom, whether of evacuation or of irritation, appear in the
intestines, or in the hypochondria, such as will be described.
Obstinate insomnolency impairs the digestion of the food and drink,
and in other respects changes and relaxes the body, and occasions a
heated state, and heaviness of the head.

14. One must determine by such marks as these, when sweet, strong,
and dark wine, hydromel, water and oxymel, should be given in acute
diseases. Wherefore the sweet affects the head less than the strong,
attacks the brain less, evacuates the bowels more than the other,
but induces swelling of the spleen and liver; it does not agree with
bilious persons, for it causes them to thirst; it creates flatulence
in the upper part of the intestinal canal, but does not disagree
with the lower part, as far as regards flatulence; and yet
flatulence engendered by sweet wine is not of a transient nature,
but rests for a long time in the hypochondria. And therefore it in
general is less diuretic than wine which is strong and thin; but sweet
wine is more expectorant than the other. But when it creates thirst,
it is less expectorant in such cases than the other wine, but if it do
not create thirst, it promotes expectoration better than the other.
The good and bad effects of a white, strong wine, have been already
frequently and fully stated in the disquisition on sweet wine; it is
determined to the bladder more than the other, is diuretic and
laxative, and should be very useful in such complaints; for if in
other respects it be less suitable than the other, the clearing out of
the bladder effected by it is beneficial to the patient, if properly
administered. There are excellent examples of the beneficial and
injurious effects of wine, all which were left undetermined by my
predecessors. In these diseases you may use a yellow wine, and a
dark austere wine for the following purposes: if there be no heaviness
of the head, nor delirium, nor stoppage of the expectoration, nor
retention of the urine, and if the alvine discharges be more loose and
like scrapings than usual, in such cases a change from a white wine to
such as I have mentioned, might be very proper. It deserves further to
be known, that it will prove less injurious to all the parts above,
and to the bladder, if it be of a more watery nature, but that the
stronger it is, it will be the more beneficial to the bowels.

15. Hydromel, when drunk in any stage of acute disease, is less
suitable to persons of a bilious temperament, and to those who have
enlarged viscera, than to those of a different character; it increases
thirst less than sweet wine; character;the lungs, is moderately
expectorant, and alleviates a cough; for it has some detergent quality
in it, whence it lubricates the sputum. Hydromel is also moderately
diuretic, unless prevented by the state of any of the viscera. And
it also occasions bilious discharges downwards, sometimes of a
proper character, and sometimes more intense and frothy than is
suitable; but such rather occurs in persons who are bilious, and
have enlarged viscera. Hydromel rather produces expectoration, and
softening of the lungs, when given diluted with water. But unmixed
hydromel, rather than the diluted, produces frothy evacuations, such
as are unseasonably and intensely bilious, and too hot; but such an
evacuation occasions other great mischiefs, for it neither
extinguishes the heat in the hypochondria, but rouses it, induces
inquietude, and jactitation of the limbs, and ulcerates the intestines
and anus. The remedies for all these will be described afterwards.
By using hydromel without ptisans, instead of any other drink, you
will generally succeed in the treatment of such diseases, and fall
in few cases; but in what instances it is to be given, and in what
it is not to be given, and wherefore it is not to be given,- all
this has been explained already, for the most part. Hydromel is
generally condemned, as if it weakened the powers of those who drink
it, and on that account it is supposed to accelerate death; and this
opinion arose from persons who starve themselves to death, some of
whom use hydromel alone for drink, as fancying that it really has this
effect. But this is by no means always the case. For hydromel, if
drunk alone, is much stronger than water, if it do not disorder the
bowels; but in some respects it is stronger, and in some weaker,
than wine that is thin, weak, and devoid of bouquet. There is a
great difference between unmixed wine and unmixed honey, as to their
nutritive powers, for if a man will drink double the quantity of
pure wine, to a certain quantity of honey which is swallowed, he
will find himself much stronger from the honey, provided it do not
disagree with his bowels, and that his alvine evacuations from it will
be much more copious. But if he shall use ptisan for a draught, and
drink afterward hydromel, he will feel full, flatulent, and
uncomfortable in the viscera of the hypochondrium; but if the hydromel
be taken before the draught, it will not have the same injurious
effects as if taken after it, but will be rather beneficial. And
boiled hydromel has a much more elegant appearance than the
unboiled, being clear, thin, white, and transparent, but I am unable
to mention any good quality which it possesses that the other wants.
For it is not sweeter than the unboiled, provided the honey be fine,
and it is weaker, and occasions less copious evacuations of the
bowels, neither of which effects is required from the hydromel. But
one should by all means use it boiled, provided the honey be bad,
impure, black, and not fragrant, for the boiling will remove the
most of its bad qualities and appearances.

16. You will find the drink, called oxymel, often very useful in
these complaints, for it promotes expectoration and freedom of
breathing. the following are the proper occasions for administering
it. When strongly acid it has no mean operation in rendering the
expectoration more easy, for by bringing up the sputa, which
occasion troublesome hawking, and rendering them more slippery, and,
as it were, clearing the windpipe with a feather, it relieves the
lungs and proves emollient to them; and when it succeeds in
producing these effects it must do much good. But there are cases in
which hydromel, strongly acid, does not promote expectoration, but
renders it more viscid and thus does harm, and it is most apt to
produce these bad effects in cases which are otherwise of a fatal
character, when the patient is unable to cough or bring up the
sputa. On this account, then, one ought to consider beforehand the
strength of the patient, and if there be any hope, then one may give
it, but if given at all in such cases it should be quite tepid, and in
by no means large doses. But if slightly acrid it moistens the mouth
and throat, promotes expectoration, and quenches thirst; agrees with
the viscera seated in the hypochondrium, and obviates the bad
effects of the honey; for the bilious quality of the honey is
thereby corrected. It also promotes flatulent discharges from the
bowels, and is diuretic, but it occasions watery discharges and
those resembling scrapings, from the lower part of the intestine,
which is sometimes a bad thing in acute diseases, more especially when
the flatulence cannot be passed, but rolls backwards; and otherwise it
diminishes the strength and makes the extremities cold, this is the
only bad effect worth mentioning which I have known to arise from
the oxymel. It may suit well to drink a little of this at night before
the draught of ptisan, and when a considerable interval of time has
passed after the draught there will be nothing to prevent its being
taken. But to those who are restricted entirely to drinks without
draughts of ptisan, it will therefore not be proper at all times to
give it, more especially from the fretting and irritation of the
intestine which it occasions, (and these bad effects it will be the
more apt to produce provided there be no faeces in the intestines
and the patient is laboring under inanition,) and then it will
weaken the powers of the hydromel. But if it appears advantageous to
use a great deal of this drink during the whole course of the disease,
one should add to it merely as much vinegar as can just be perceived
by the taste, for thus what is prejudicial in it will do the least
possible harm, and what is beneficial will do the more good. In a
word, the acidity of vinegar agrees rather with those who are troubled
with bitter bile, than with those patients whose bile is black; for
the bitter principle is dissolved in it and turned to phlegm, by being
suspended in it; whereas black bile is fermented, swells up, and is
multiplied thereby: for vinegar is a melanogogue. Vinegar is more
prejudicial to women than to men, for it creates pains in the uterus.

17. I have nothing further to add as to the effects of water when
used as a drink in acute diseases; for it neither soothes the cough in
pneumonia, nor promotes expectoration, but does less than the others
in this respect, if used alone through the whole complaint. But if
taken intermediate between oxymel and hydromel, in small quantity,
it promotes expectoration from the change which it occasions in the
qualities of these drinks, for it produces, as it were, a certain
overflow. Otherwise it does not quench the thirst, for it creates bile
in a bilious temperament, and is injurious to the hypochondrium; and
it does the most harm, engenders most bile, and does the least good
when the bowels are empty; and it increases the swelling of the spleen
and liver when they are in an inflamed state; it produces a gurgling
noise in the intestines and swims on the stomach; for it passes slowly
downwards, as being of a coldish and indigestible nature, and
neither proves laxative nor diuretic; and in this respect, too, it
proves prejudicial, that it does not naturally form does in the
intestines: and, if it be drunk while the feet are cold, its injurious
effects will be greatly aggravated, in all those parts to which it may
be determined. When you suspect in these diseases either strong
heaviness of the head, or mental alienation, you must abstain entirely
from wine, and in this case use water, or give weak, straw-colored
wine, entirely devoid of bouquet, after which a little water is to
be given in addition; for thus the strength of the will less affect
the head and the understanding: but in which cases water is mostly
to be given for drink, when in large quantity, when in moderate,
when cold, and when hot; all these things have either been discussed
already or will be treated of at the proper time. In like manner, with
respect to all the others, such as barley-water, the drinks made
from green shoots, those from raisins, and the skins of grapes and
wheat, and bastard saffron, and myrtles, pomegranates, and the others,
when the proper time for using them is come, they will be treated of
along with the disease in question, in like manner as the other
compound medicines.

18. The bath is useful in many diseases, in some of them when used
steadily, and in others when not so. Sometimes it must be less used
than it would be otherwise, from the want of accommodation; for in few
families are all the conveniences prepared, and persons who can manage
them as they ought to be. And if the patient be not bathed properly,
he maybe thereby hurt in no inconsiderable degree, for there is
required a place to cover him that is free of smoke, abundance of
water, materials for frequent baths, but not very large, unless this
should be required. It is better that no friction should be applied,
but if so, a hot soap (smegma) must be used in greater abundance
than is common, and an affusion of a considerable quantity of water is
to be made at the same time and afterwards repeated. There must also
be a short passage to the basin, and it should be of easy ingress
and egress. But the person who takes the bath should be orderly and
reserved in his manner, should do nothing for himself, but others
should pour the water upon him and rub him, and plenty of waters, of
various temperatures, should be in readiness for the douche, and the
affusions quickly made; and sponges should be used instead of the comb
(strigil), and the body should be anointed when not quite dry. But the
head should be rubbed by the sponge until it is quite dry; the
extremities should be protected from cold, as also the head and the
rest of the body; and a man should not be washed immediately after
he has taken a draught of ptisan or a drink; neither should he take
ptisan as a drink immediately after the bath. Much will depend upon
whether the patient, when in good health, was very fond of the bath,
and in the custom of taking it: for such persons, especially, feel the
want of it, and are benefited if they are bathed, and injured if
they are not. In general it suits better with cases of pneumonia
than in ardent fevers; for the bath soothes the pain in the side,
chest, and back; concocts the sputa, promotes expectoration,
improves the respiration, and allays lassitude; for it soothes the
joints and outer skin, and is diuretic, removes heaviness of the head,
and moistens the nose. Such are the benefits to be derived from the
bath, if all the proper requisites be present; but if one or more of
these be wanting, the bath, instead of doing good, may rather prove
injurious; for every one of them may do harm if not prepared not
prepared by the attendants in the proper manner. It is by no means a
suitable thing in these diseases to persons whose bowels are too
loose, or when they are unusually confined, and there has been no
previous evacuation; neither must we bathe those who are
debilitated, nor such as have nausea or vomiting, or bilious
eructations; nor such as have hemorrhage from the nose, unless it be
less than required at that stage of the disease (with those stages you
are acquainted), but if the discharge be less than proper, one
should use the bath, whether in order to benefit the whole body or the
head alone. If then the proper requisites be at hand, and the
patient be well disposed to the bath, it may be administered once
every day, or if the patient be fond of the bath there will be no
harm, though he should take it twice in the day. The use of the bath
is much more appropriate to those who take unstrained ptisan, than
to those who take only the juice of it, although even in their case it
may be proper; but least of all does it suit with those who use only
plain drink, although, in their case too it may be suitable; but one
must form a judgment from the rules laid down before, in which of
these modes of regimen the bath will be beneficial, and in which
not. Such as want some of the requisites for a proper bath, but have
those symptoms which would be benefited by it, should be bathed;
whereas those who want none of the proper requisites, but have certain
symptoms which contraindicate the bath, are not to be bathed.

Footnote

Ardent fever (causus) takes place when the veins, being dried up
in the summer season, attract acrid and bilious humors to
themselves; and strong fever seizes the whole body, which
experiences aches of the bones, and is in a state of lassitude and
pain. It takes place most commonly from a long walk and protracted
thirst, when the veins being dried up attract acrid and hot defluxions
to themselves. The tongue becomes rough, dry, and very black; there
are gnawing pains about the bowels; the alvine discharges are watery
and yellow; there is intense thirst, insomnolency, and sometimes
wandering of the mind. To a person in such a state give to drink water
and as much boiled hydromel of a watery consistence as he will take;
and if the mouth be bitter, it may be advantageous to administer an
emetic and clyster; and if these things do not loosen the bowels,
purge with the boiled milk of asses. Give nothing saltish nor acrid,
for they will not be borne; and give no draughts of ptisan until the
crisis be past. And the affection is resolved if there be an
epistaxis, or if true critical sweats supervene with urine having
white, thick, and smooth sediments, or if a deposit take place
anywhere; but if it be resolved without these, there will be a relapse
of the complaint, or pain in the hips and legs will ensue, with
thick sputa, provided the patient be convalescent. Another species
of ardent fever: belly loose, much thirst, tongue rough, dry, and
saltish, retention of urine, insomnolency, extremities cold. In such a
case, unless there be a flow of blood from the nose, or an abscess
form about the neck, or pain in the limbs, or the patient
expectorate thick sputa (these occur when the belly is constipated),
or pain of the hips, or lividity of the genital organs, there is no
crisis; tension of the testicle is also a critical symptom. Give
attractive draughts.

2. Bleed in the acute affections, if the disease appear strong,
and the patients be in the vigor of life, and if they have strength.
If it be quinsy or any other of the pleuritic affections, purge with
electuaries; but if the patient be weaker, or if you abstract more
blood, you may administer a clyster every third day, until he be out
of danger, and enjoin total abstinence if necessary.

3. Hypochondria inflamed not from retention of flatus, tension of
the diaphragm, checked respiration, with dry orthopnoea, when no pus
is formed, but when these complaints are connected with obstructed
respiration; but more especially strong pains of the liver,
heaviness of the spleen, and other phlegmasiae and intense pains above
the diaphragm, diseases connected with collections of humors,- all
these diseases do not admit of resolution, if treated at first by
medicine, but venesection holds the first place in conducting the
treatment; then we may have recourse to a clyster, unless the
disease be great and strong; but if so, purging also may be necessary;
but bleeding and purging together require caution and moderation.
Those who attempt to resolve inflammatory diseases at the commencement
by the administration of purgative medicines, remove none of the
morbific humors which produce the inflammation and tension; for the
diseases while unconcocted could not yield, but they melt down those
parts which are healthy and resist the disease; so when the body is
debilitated the malady obtains the mastery; and when the disease has
the upper hand of the body, it does not admit of a cure.

4. When a person suddenly loses his speech, in connection with
obstruction of the veins,- if this happen without warning or any other
strong cause, one ought to open the internal vein of the right arm,
and abstract blood more or less according to the habit and age of
the patient. Such cases are mostly attended with the following
symptoms: redness of the face, eyes fixed, hands distended, grinding
of the teeth, palpitations, jaws fixed, coldness of the extremities,
retention of airs in the veins.

5. When pains precede, and there are influxes of black bile and of
acrid humors, and when by their pungency the internal parts are
pained, and the veins being pinched and dried become distended, and
getting inflamed attract the humors running into the parts, whence the
blood being vitiated, and the airs collected there not being able to
find their natural passages, coldness comes on in consequence of
this stasis, with vertigo, loss of speech, heaviness of the head,
and convulsion, if the disease fix on the liver, the heart, or the
great vein (vena cava?); whence they are seized with epilepsy or
apoplexy, if the defluxions fall upon the containing parts, and if
they are dried up by airs which cannot make their escape; such persons
having been first tormented are to be immediately bled at the
commencement, while all the peccant vapors and humors are buoyant, for
then the cases more easily admit of a cure; and then supporting the
strength and attending to the crisis, we may give emetics, unless
the disease be alleviated; or if the bowels be not moved, we may
administer a clyster and give the boiled milk of asses, to the
amount of not less than twelve heminae, or if the strength permit,
to more than sixteen.

6. Quinsy takes place when a copious and viscid defluxion from the
head, in the season of winter or spring, flows into the jugular veins,
and when from their large size they attract a greater defluxion; and
when owing to the defluxion being of a cold and viscid nature it
becomes enfarcted, obstructing the passages of the respiration and
of the blood, coagulates the surrounding blood, and renders it
motionless and stationary, it being naturally cold and disposed to
obstructions. Hence they are seized with convulsive suffocation, the
tongue turning livid, assuming a rounded shape, and being vent owing
to the veins which are seated below the tongue (for when an enlarged
uvula, which is called uva, is cut, a large vein may be observed on
each side). These veins, then, becoming filled, and their roots
extending into the tongue, which is of a loose and spongy texture, it,
owing to its dryness receiving forcibly the juice from the veins,
changes from broad and becomes round, its natural color turns to
livid, from a soft consistence it grows hard, instead of being
flexible it becomes inflexible, so that the patient would soon be
suffocated unless speedily relieved. Bleeding, then, in the arm, and
opening the sublingual veins, and purging with the electuaries, and
giving warm gargles, and shaving the head, we must apply to it and the
neck a cerate, and wrap them round with wool, and foment with soft
sponges squeezed out of hot water; give to drink water and hydromel,
not cold; and administer the juice of ptisan when, having passed the
crisis, the patient is out of danger. When, in the season of summer or
autumn, there is a hot and nitrous defluxion from the head (it is
rendered hot and acrid by the season), being of such a nature it
corrodes and ulcerates, and fills with air, and orthopnoea attended
with great dryness supervenes; the fauces, when examined, do not
seem swollen; the tendons on the back part of the neck are contracted,
and have the appearance as if it were tetanus; the voice is lost,
the breathing is small, and inspiration becomes frequent and
laborious. In such persons the trachea becomes ulcerated, and the
lungs engorged, from the patient's not being able to draw in the
external air. In such cases, unless there be a spontaneous
determination to the external parts of the neck, the symptoms become
still more dreadful, and the danger more imminent, partly owing to the
season, and the hot and acrid humors which cause the disease.

7. When fever seizes a person who has lately taken food, and whose
bowels are loaded with faeces which have been long retained, whether it
be attended with pain of the side or not, he ought to lie quiet
until the food descend to the lower region of the bowels, and use
oxymel for drink; but when the load descends to the loins, a clyster
should be administered, or he should be purged by medicine; and when
purged, he should take ptisan for food and hydromel for drink; then he
may take the cerealia, and boiled fishes, and a watery wine in small
quantity, at night, but during the day, a watery hydromel. When the
flatus is offensive, either a suppository or clyster is to be
administered; but otherwise the oxymel is to be discontinued, until
the matters descend to the lower part of the bowels, and then they are
to be evacuated by a clyster. But if the ardent fever (causus)
supervene when the bowels are empty, should you still judge it
proper to administer purgative medicine, it ought not be done during
the first three days, nor earlier than the fourth. When you give the
medicine, use the ptisan, observing the paroxysms of the fevers, so as
not to give it when the fever is setting in, but when it is ceasing,
or on the decline, and as far as possible from the commencement.
When the feet are cold, give neither drink nor ptisan, nor anything
else of the kind, but reckon it an important rule to refrain until
they become warm, and then you may administer them with advantage. For
the most part, coldness of the feet is a symptom of a paroxysm of
the fever coming on; and if at such a season you apply those things,
you will commit the greatest possible mistake, for you will augment
the disease in no small degree. But when the fever ceases, the feet,
on the contrary, become hotter than the rest of the body; for when the
heat leaves the feet, it is kindled up in the breast, and sends its
flame up to the head. And when all the heat rushes upwards, and is
exhaled at the head, it is not to be wondered at that the feet
become cold, being devoid of flesh, and tendinous; and besides, they
contract cold, owing to their distance from the hotter parts of the
body, an accumulation of heat having taken place in the chest: and
again, in like manner, when the fever is resolved and dissipated,
the heat descends to the feet, and, at the same time, the head and
chest become cold. Wherefore one should attend to this; that when
the feet are cold, the bowels are necessarily hot, and filled with
nauseous matters; the hypochondrium distended: there is jactitation of
the body, owing to the internal disturbance; and aberration of the
intellect, and pains; the patient is agitated, and wishes to vomit,
and if he vomits bad matters he is pained; but when the heat
descends to the feet, and the urine passes freely, he is every way
lightened, even although he does not sweat; at this season, then,
the ptisan ought to be given; it would be death to give it before.

8. When the bowels are loose during the whole course of fevers, in
this case we are most especially to warm the feet, and see that they
are properly treated with cerates, and wrapped in shawls, so that they
may not become colder than the rest of the body; but when they are
hot, no fomentation must be made to them, but care is to be taken that
they do not become cold; and very little drink is to be used, either
cold water or hydromel. In those cases of fever where the bowels are
loose, and the mind is disordered, the greater number of patients pick
the wool from their blankets, scratch their noses, answer briefly when
questions are put to them, but, when left to themselves, utter nothing
that is rational. Such attacks appear to me to be connected with black
bile. When in these cases there is a colliquative diarrhoea, I am of
opinion that we ought to give the colder and thicker ptisans, and that
the drinks ought to be binding, of a vinous nature, and rather
astringent. In cases of fever attended from the first with vertigo,
throbbing of the head, and thin urine, you may expect the fever to
be exacerbated at the crisis; neither need it excite wonder,
although there be delirium. When, at the commencement, the urine is
cloudy or thick, it is proper to purge gently, provided this be
otherwise proper; but when the urine at first is thin, do not purge
such patients, but, if thought necessary, give a clyster; such
patients should be thus treated; they should be kept in a quiet state,
have unguents applied to them, and be covered up properly with
clothes, and they should use for drink a watery hydromel, and the
juice of ptisan as a draught in the evening; clear out the bowels at
first with a clyster, but give no purgative medicines to them, for, if
you move the bowels strongly, the urine is not concocted, but the
fever remains long, without sweats and without a crisis. Do not give
draughts when the time of the crisis is at hand, if there be
agitation, but only when the fever abates and is alleviated. It is
proper to be guarded at the crises of other fevers, and to withhold
the draughts at that season. Fevers of this description are apt to
be protracted, and to have determinations, if the inferior extremities
be cold, about the ears and neck, or, if these parts are not cold,
to have other changes; they have epistaxis, and disorder of the
bowels. But in cases of fever attended with nausea, or distention of
the hypochondria, when the patients cannot lie reclined in the same
position, and the extremities are cold, the greatest care and
precaution are necessary; nothing should be given to them, except
oxymel diluted with water; no draught should be administered, until
the fever abate and the urine be concocted; the patient should be laid
in a dark apartment, and recline upon the softest couch, and he should
be kept as long as possible in the same position, so as not to toss
about, for this is particularly beneficial to him. Apply to the
hypochondrium linseed by inunctions, taking care that he do not
catch cold when the application is made; let it be in a tepid state,
and boiled in water and oil. One may judge from the urine what is to
take place, for if the urine be thicker, and more yellowish, so much
the better; but if it be thinner, and blacker, so much the worse;
but if it undergo changes, it indicates a prolongation of the disease,
and the patient, in like manner, must experience a change to the worse
and the better. Irregular fevers should be let alone until they become
settled, and, when they do settle, they are to be treated by a
suitable diet and medicine, attending to the constitution of the
patient.

9. The aspects of the sick are various; wherefore the physician
should pay attention, that he may not miss observing the exciting
causes, as far as they can be ascertained by reasoning, nor such
symptoms as should appear on an even or odd day, but he ought to, be
particularly guarded in observing the odd days, as it is in them, more
especially, that changes take place in patients. He should mark,
particularly, the first day on which the patient became ill,
considering when and whence the disease commenced, for this is of
primary importance to know. When you examine the patient, inquire into
all particulars; first how the head is, and if there be no headache,
nor heaviness in it; then examine if the and sides be free of pain;
for if the hypochondrium be painful, swelled, and unequal, with a
sense of satiety, or if there be pain in the side, and, along with the
pain, either cough, tormina, or belly-ache, if any of these symptoms
be present in the hypochondrium, the bowels should be opened with
clysters, and the patient should drink boiled hydromel in a hot state.
The physician should ascertain whether the patient be apt to faint
when he is raised up, and whether his breathing be free; and examine
the discharges from the bowels, whether they be very black, or of a
proper color, like those of persons in good health, and ascertain
whether the fever has a paroxysm every third day, and look well to
such persons on those days. And should the fourth day prove like the
third, the patient is in a dangerous state. With regard to the
symptoms, black stools prognosticate death; but if they resemble the
discharges of a healthy person, and if such is their appearance
every day, it is a favorable symptom; but when the bowels do not yield
to a suppository, and when, though the respiration be natural, the
patient when raised to the night table, or even in bed, be seized with
deliquium, you may expect that the patient, man or woman, who
experiences these symptoms, is about to fall to fall into a state of
delirium. Attention also should be paid to the hands, for if they
tremble, you may expect epistaxis; and observe the nostrils, whether
the breath be drawn in equally by both; and if expiration by the
nostrils be large, a convulsion is apt to take place; and should a
convulsion occur to such a person, death may be anticipated, and it is
well to announce it beforehand.

10. If, in a winter fever, the tongue be rough, and if there be
swoonings, it is likely to be the remission of the fever. Nevertheless
such a person is to be kept upon a restricted diet, with water for
drink, and hydromel, and the strained juices, not trusting to the
remission of the fevers, as persons having these symptoms are in
danger of dying; when, therefore, you perceive these symptoms,
announce this prognostic, if you shall judge proper, after making
the suitable observations. When, in fevers, any dangerous symptom
appears on the fifth day, when watery discharges suddenly take place
from the bowels, when deliquium animi occurs, or the patient is
attacked with loss of speech, convulsions, or hiccup, under such
circumstances he is likely to be affected with nausea, and sweats
break out under the nose and forehead, or on the back part of the neck
and head, and patients with such symptoms shortly die, from stoppage
of the respiration. When, in fevers, abscesses form about the legs,
and, getting into a chronic state, are not concocted while the fever
persists, and if one is seized with a sense of suffocation in the
throat, while the fauces are not swelled, and if it do not come to
maturation, but is repressed, in such a case there is apt to be a flow
of blood from the nose; if this, then, be copious, it indicates a
resolution of the disease, but if not, a prolongation of the
complaint; and the less the discharge, so much worse the symptoms, and
the more protracted the disease; but if the other symptoms are very
favorable, expect in such a case that pains will fall upon the feet;
if then they attack the feet, and if these continue long in a very
painful, and inflamed state, and if there be no resolution, the
pains will extend by degrees to the neck, to the clavicle, shoulder,
breast, or to some articulation, in which an inflammatory tumor will
necessarily form. When these are reduced, if the hands are contracted,
and become trembling, convulsion and delirium seize such a person; but
blisters break out on the eyebrow, erythema takes place, the one
eyelid being tumefied overtops the other, a hard inflammation sets in,
the eye become strongly swelled, and the delirium increases much,
but makes its attacks rather at night than by day. These symptoms more
frequently occur on odd than on even days, but, whether on the one
or the other, they are of a fatal character. Should you determine to
give purgative medicines in such cases, at the commencement, you
should do so before the fifth day, if there be borborygmi in the
bowels, or, if not, you should omit the medicines altogether. If there
be borborygmi, with bilious stools, purge moderately with scammony;
but with regard to the treatment otherwise, administer as few drinks
and draughts as until there be some amendment, and the disease is past
the fourteenth day. When loss of speech seizes a person, on the
fourteenth day of a fever, there is not usually a speedy resolution,
nor any removal of the disease, for this symptom indicates a
protracted disease; and when it appears on that day, it will be
still more prolonged. When, on the fourth day of a fever, the tongue
articulates confusedly, and when there are watery and bilious
discharges from the bowels, such a patient is apt to fall into a state
of delirium; the physician ought, therefore, to watch him, and
attend to whatever symptoms may turn up. In the season of summer and
autumn an epistaxis, suddenly occurring in acute diseases, indicates
vehemence of the attack, and inflammation in the course of the
veins, and on the day following, the discharge of thin urine; and if
the patient be in the prime of life, and if his body be strong from
exercise, and brawny, or of a melancholic temperament, or if from
drinking has trembling hands, it may be well to announce beforehand
either delirium or convulsion; and if these symptoms occur on even
days, so much the better; but on critical days, they are of a deadly
character. If, then, a copious discharge of blood procure an issue
to the fullness thereof about the nose, or what is collected about the
anus, there will be an abscess, or pains in the hypochondrium, or
testicles, or in the limbs; and when these are resolved, there will be
a discharge of thick sputa, and of smooth, thin urine. In fever
attended with singultus, give asafoetida, oxymel, and carrot,
triturated together, in a draught; or galbanum in honey, and cumin
in a linctus, or the juice of ptisan. Such a person cannot escape,
unless critical sweats and gentle sleep supervene, and thick and acrid
urine be passed, or the disease terminate in an abscess: give
pine-fruit and myrrh in a linctus, and further give a very little
oxymel to drink; but if they are very thirsty, some barley-water.

11. Peripneumonia, and pleuritic affections, are to be thus
observed: If the fever be acute, and if there be pains on either side,
or in both, and if expiration be if cough be present, and the sputa
expectorated be of a blond or livid color, or likewise thin, frothy,
and florid, or having any other character different from the common,
in such a case, the physician should proceed thus: if the pain pass
upward to the clavicle, or the breast, or the arm, the inner vein in
the arm should be opened on the side affected, and blood abstracted
according to the habit, age, and color of the patient, and the
season of the year, and that largely and boldly, if the pain be acute,
so as to bring on deliquium animi, and afterwards a clyster is to be
given. But if the pain be below the chest, and if very intense,
purge the bowels gently in such an attack of pleurisy, and during
the act of purging give nothing; but after the purging give oxymel.
The medicine is to be administered on the fourth day; on the first
three days after the commencement, a clyster should be given, and if
it does not relieve the patient, he should then be gently purged,
but he is to be watched until the fever goes off, and till the seventh
day; then if he appear to be free from danger, give him some
unstrained ptisan, in small quantity, and thin at first, mixing it
with honey. If the expectoration be easy, and the breathing free, if
his sides be free of pain, and if the fever be gone, he may take the
ptisan thicker, and in larger quantity, twice a day. But if he do
not progress favorably, he must get less of the drink, and of the
draught, which should be thin, and only given once a day, at
whatever is judged to be the most favorable hour; this you will
ascertain from the urine. The draught is not to be given to persons
after fever, until you see that the urine and sputa are concocted (if,
indeed, after the administration of the medicine he be purged
frequently, it may be necessary to give it, but it should be given
in smaller quantities and thinner than usual, for from inanition he
will be unable to sleep, or digest properly, or wait the crisis);
but when the melting down of crude matters has taken place, and his
system has cast off what is offensive, there will then be no
objection. The sputa are concocted when they resemble pus, and the
urine when it has reddish sediments like tares. But there is nothing
to prevent fomentations and cerates being applied for the other
pains of the sides; and the legs and loins may be rubbed with hot oil,
or anointed with fat; linseed, too, in the form of a cataplasm, may be
applied to the hypochondrium and as far up as the breasts. When
pneumonia is at its height, the case is beyond remedy if he is not
purged, and it is bad if he has dyspnoea, and urine that is thin and
acrid, and if sweats come out about the neck and head, for such sweats
are bad, as proceeding from the suffocation, rales, and the violence
of the disease which is obtaining the upper hand, unless there be a
copious evacuation of thick urine, and the sputa be concocted; when
either of these come on spontaneously, that will carry off the
disease. A linctus for pneumonia: Galbanum and pine-fruit in Attic
honey; and southernwood in oxymel; make a decoction of pepper and
black hellebore, and give it in cases of pleurisy attended with
violent pain at the commencement. It is also a good thing to boil
opoponax in oxymel, and, having strained it, to give it to drink; it
answers well, also, in diseases of the liver, and in severe pains
proceeding from the diaphragm, and in all cases in which it is
beneficial to determine to the bowels or urinary organs, when given in
wine and honey; when given to act upon the bowels, it should be
drunk in larger quantity, along with a watery hydromel.

12. A dysentery, when stopped, will give rise to an aposteme, or
tumor, if it do not terminate in fevers with sweats, or with thick and
white urine, or in a tertian fever, or the pain fix upon a varix, or
the testicles, or on the hip-joints.

13. In a bilious fever, jaundice coming on with rigor before the
seventh day carries off the fever, but if it occur without the
fever, and not at the proper time, it is a fatal symptom.

14. When the loins are in a tetanic state, and the spirits in the
veins are obstructed by melancholic humors, venesection will afford
relief. But when, on the other hand, the anterior tendons are strongly
contracted, and if there be sweats about the neck and face, extorted
by the violent pain of the parched and dried tendons of the sacral
extremity (these are very thick, sustaining the spine, and giving rise
to very great ligaments, which terminate in the feet,) in such a case,
unless fever and sleep come on, followed by concocted urine and
critical sweats, give to drink a strong Cretan wine, and boiled
barley-meal for food; anoint and rub with ointments containing wax;
bathe the legs and feet in hot water, and then cover them up; and so
in like manner the arms, as far as the hands, and the spine, from
the neck to the sacrum, are to be wrapped in a skin smeared with
wax; this must extend to the parts beyond, and intervals are to be
left for applying fomentations, by means of leather bottles filled
with hot water, then, wrapping him up in a linen cloth, lay him down
in bed. Do not open the bowels, unless by means of a suppository, when
they have been long of being moved. If there be any remission of the
disease, so far well, but otherwise, pound of the root of bryonia in
fragrant wine, and that of the carrot, and give to the patient fasting
early in the morning, before using the affusion, and immediately
afterwards let him eat boiled barley-meal in a tepid state, and as
much as he can take, and in addition let him drink, if he will, wine
well diluted. If the disease yield to these means, so much the better,
but, if otherwise, you must prognosticate accordingly.

15. All diseases are resolved either by the mouth, the bowels, the
bladder, or some other such organ. Sweat is a common form of
resolution in all these cases.

16. You should put persons on a course of hellebore who are troubled
with a defluxion from the head. But do not administer hellebore to
such persons as are laboring under empyema connected with abscesses,
haemoptysis, and intemperament, or any other strong cause, for it will
do no good; and if any thing unpleasant occur the hellebore will get
the blame of it. But if the body have suddenly lost its powers, or
if there be pain in the head, or obstruction of the ears and nose,
or ptyalism, or heaviness of the limbs, or an extraordinary swelling
of the body, you may administer the hellebore, provided these symptoms
be not connected with drinking, nor with immoderate venery; nor with
sorrow, vexation, nor insomnolency, for, if any of these causes exist,
the treatment must have respect to it.

17. From walking arise pains of the sides, of the back, of the
loins, and of the hip-joint, and disorder of the respiration has often
been from the same cause, for, after excesses of wine and flatulent
food, pains shoot to the loins and hips, accompanied with dysuria.
Walking is the cause of such complaints, and also of coryza and
hoarseness.

18. Disorders connected with regimen, for the most part, make
their attack accordingly as any one has changed his habitual mode of
diet. For persons who dine contrary to custom experience much swelling
of the stomach, drowsiness, and fullness; and if they take supper over
and above, their belly is disordered; such persons will be benefited
by sleeping after taking the bath, and by walking slowly for a
considerable time after sleep; if, then, the bowels be moved, he may
dine and drink a small quantity of wine not much diluted; but if the
bowels are not opened, he should get his body rubbed with hot oil,
and, if thirsty, drink of some weak and white wine, or a sweet wine,
and take repose; if he does not sleep he should repose the longer.
In other respects he should observe the regimen laid down for those
who have taken a debauch. With regard to the bad effects of drinks,
such as are of a watery nature pass more slowly through the body, they
regurgitate, as it were, and float about the hypochondria, and do
not flow readily by urine; when filled up with such a drink, he should
not attempt any violent exertion, requiring either strength or
swiftness, but should rest as much as possible until the drink has
been digested along with the food; but such drinks as are stronger
or more austere, occasion palpitation in the body and throbbing in the
head, and in this case the person affected will do well to sleep,
and take some hot draught for which he feels disposed; for
abstinence is bad in headache and the effects of a surfeit. Those who,
contrary to usage, restrict themselves to one meal, feel empty and
feeble, and pass hot urine in consequence of the emptiness of their
vessels; they have a salt and bitter taste in the mouth; they
tremble at any work they attempt; their temples throb; and they cannot
digest their supper so well as if they had previously taken their
dinner. Such persons should take less supper than they are wont, and a
pudding of barley-meal more moist than usual instead of bread, and
of potherbs the dock, or mallow, and ptisan, or beets, and along
with the food they should take wine in moderation, and diluted with
water; after supper they should take a short walk, until the urine
descend and be passed; and they may use boiled fish.
Articles of food have generally such effects as the following:
Garlic occasions flatulence and heat about the chest, heaviness of the
head, and nausea, and any other habitual pain is apt to be exasperated
by it; it is diuretic, which, in so far, is a good property which it
possesses; but to eat it when one means to drink to excess, or when
intoxicated. Cheese produces flatulence and constipation, and heats
the other articles of food; and it gives rise to crudities and
indigestion, but it is worst of all to eat it along with drink after a
full meal. Pulse of all kinds are flatulent, whether raw, boiled, or
fried; least so when macerated in water, or in a green state; they
should not be used except along with food prepared from the
cerealia. Each of these articles, articles, however, has bad effects
peculiar to itself. The vetch, whether raw or boiled, creates
flatulence and pain. The lentil is astringent, and disorders the
stomach if taken with its hull. The lupine has the fewest bad
effects of all these things. The stalk and the juice of silphium
(asafoetida), pass through some people's bowels very readily, but in
others, not accustomed to them, they engender what is called dry
cholera; this complaint is more especially produced by it if mixed
with much cheese, or eaten along with beef. Melancholic diseases are
most particularly exacerbated by beef, for it is of an unmanageable
nature, and requires no ordinary powers of stomach to digest it; it
will agree best with those who use it well boiled and pretty long
kept. Goat's flesh has all the bad properties of beef; it is an
indigestible, more flatulent and engenders acid eructations and
cholera; such as has a fragrant smell, is firm, and sweet to the
taste, is the best, when well baked and cooled; but those kinds
which are disagreeable to the taste, have a bad smell, and are hard,
such are particularly bad, and especially if very fresh; it is best in
summer and worst in autumn. The flesh of young pigs is bad, either
when it is too raw or when it is over-roasted, for it engenders bile
and disorders the bowels. Of all kinds of flesh, pork is the best;
it is best when neither very fat, nor, on the other hand, very lean,
and the animal had not attained the age of what is reckoned an old
victim; it should be eaten without the skin, and in a coldish state.

19. In dry cholera the belly is distended with wind, there is
rumbling in the bowels, pain in the sides and loins, no dejections,
but, on the contrary, the bowels are constipated. In such a case you
should guard against vomiting, but endeavor to get the bowels
opened. As quickly as possible give a clyster of hot water with plenty
of oil in it, and having rubbed the patient freely with unguents;
put him into hot water, laying him down in the basin, and pouring
the hot water upon him by degrees; and if, when heated in the bath,
the bowels be moved, he will be freed from the complaint. To a
person in such a complaint it will do good if he sleep, and drink a
thin, old, and strong wine; and you should give him oil, so that he
may settle, and have his bowels moved, when he will be relieved. He
must abstain from all other kinds of food; but when the pain remits,
give him asses milk to drink until he is purged. But if the bowels are
loose, with bilious discharges, tormina, vomitings, a feeling of
suffocation, and gnawing pains, it is best to enjoin repose, and to
drink hydromel, and avoid vomiting.

20. There are two kinds of dropsy, the one anasarca, which, when
formed, is incurable; the other is accompanied with emphysema
(tympanites?) and requires much good fortune to enable one to
triumph over it. Laborious exertion, fomentation, and abstinence
(are to be enjoined). The patient should eat dry and acrid things, for
thus will he pass the more water, and his strength be kept up. If he
labors under difficulty of breathing, if it is the summer season,
and if he is in the prime of life, and is strong, blood should be
abstracted from the arm, and then he should eat hot pieces of bread,
dipped in dark wine and oil, drink very little, and labor much, and
live on well-fed pork, boiled with vinegar, so that he may be able
to endure hard exercises.

21. Those who have the inferior intestines hot, and who pass acrid
and irregular stools of a colliquative nature, if they can bear it,
should procure revulsion by vomiting with hellebore; but if not,
should get a thick decoction of summer wheat in a cold state, lentil
soup, bread cooked with cinders, and fish, which should be taken
boiled if they have fever, but roasted if not feverish; and also
dark-colored wine if free of fever; but otherwise they should take the
water from medlars, myrtles, apples, services, dates, or wild vine. If
there be no fever, and if there be tormina, the patient should drink
hot asses' milk in small quantity at first, and gradually increase it,
and linseed, and wheaten flour, and having removed the bitter part
of Egyptian beans, and ground them, sprinkle on the milk and drink;
and let him eat eggs half-roasted, and fine flour, and millet, and
perl-spelt (chondrus) boiled in milk;- all these things should be
eaten cold, and similar articles of food and drink should be
administered.

22. The most important point of regimen to observe and be guarded
about in protracted diseases, is to pay attention to the exacerbations
and remissions of fevers, so as to avoid the times when food should
not be given, and to know when it may be administered without
danger; this last season is at the greatest possible distance from the
exacerbation.

23. One should be able to recognize those who have headache from
gymnastic exercises, or running, or walking or hunting, or any other
unseasonable labor, or from immoderate venery; also those who are of a
pale color, or troubled with hoarseness; those who have enlarged
spleen, those who are in a state of anaemia, those who are suffering
from tympanites, those having dry cough and thirst, those who are
flatulent, and have the course of the blood in their veins
intercepted; those persons whose hypochondria, sides, and back are
distended: those having torpor; those laboring under amaurosis, or
having noises in their ears; those suffering from incontinence of
urine or jaundice, or whose food is passed undigested; those who
have discharges of blood from the nose or anus, or who have flatulence
and intense pain, and who cannot retain the wind. In these cases you
may do mischief, but cannot possibly do any good by purging, but may
interrupt the spontaneous remissions and crises of the complaints.

24. If you think it expedient to let blood, see that the bowels be
previously settled, and then bleed; enjoin abstinence, and forbid
the use of wine; and complete the cure by means of a suitable regimen,
and wet fomentations. But if the bowels appear to be constipated,
administer a soothing clyster.

25. If you think it necessary to give medicines, you may safely
purge upwards by hellebore, but none of those should be purged
downwards. The most effectual mode of treatment is by the urine,
sweats, and exercise; and use gentle friction so as not to harden
the constitution; and if he be confined to bed let others rub him.
When the pain is seated above the diaphragm, place him erect for the
most part, and let him be as little reclined as possible; and when
he is raised up let him be rubbed for a considerable time with
plenty of hot oil. But if the pains be in the lower belly below the
diaphragm, it will be useful to lie reclined and make no motion, and
to such a person nothing should be administered except the friction.
Those pains which are dissolved by discharges from the bowels, by
urine, or moderate sweats, cease spontaneously, if they are slight,
but if strong they prove troublesome; for persons so affected either
die, or at least do not recover without further mischief, for they
terminate in abscesses.

26. A draught for a dropsical person. Take three cantharides, and
removing their head, feet, and wings, triturate their bodies in
three cupfuls (cyathi) of water, and when the person who has drunk the
draught complains of pain, let him have hot fomentations applied.
The patient should be first anointed with oil, should take the draught
fasting, and eat hot bread with oil.

27. A styptic. Apply the juice of the fig inwardly to the vein; or
having moulded biestings into a tent, introduce up the nostril, or
push up some chalcitis with the finger, and press the cartilages of
the nostrils together; and open the bowels with the boiled milk of
asses: or having shaved the head apply cold things to it if in the
summer season.

28. The sesamoides purges upwards when pounded in oxymel to the
amount of a drachm and a half, and drunk; it is combined with the
hellebores, to the amount of the third part, and thus it is less apt
to produce suffocation.

29. Trichiasis. Having introduced a thread into the eye of a
needle push it through the upper part of the distended eyelid, and
do the same at the base of it; having stretched the threads tie a knot
on them, and bind up until they drop out: and, if this be
sufficient, so far well; but if otherwise, you must do the same
thing again. And hemorrhoids, in like manner, you may treat by
transfixing them with a needle and tying them with a very thick and
large woolen thread; for thus the cure will be more certain. When
you have secured them, use a septic application, and do not foment
until they drop off, and always leave one behind; and when the patient
recovers, let him be put upon a course of hellebore. Then let him be
exercised and sweated; the friction of the gymnasium and wrestling
in the morning will be proper; but he must abstain from running,
drinking, and all acrid substances, except marjoram; let him take an
emetic every seven days, or three times in a month; for thus will he
enjoy the best bodily health. Let him take straw-colored, austere, and
watery wine, and use little drink.

30. For persons affected with empyema. Having cut some bulbs or
squill, boil in water, and when well boiled, throw this away, and
having poured in more water, boil until it appear to the touch soft
and well-boiled; then triturate finely and mix roasted cumin, and
white sesames, and young almonds pounded in honey, form into an
electuary and give; and afterwards sweet wine. In draughts, having
pounded about a small acetabulum of the white poppy, moisten it with
water in which summer wheat has been washed, add honey, and boil.
Let him take this frequently during the day. And then taking into
account what is to happen, give him supper.

31. For dysentery. A fourth part of a pound of cleaned beans, and
twelve shoots of madder having been triturated, are to be mixed
together and boiled, and given as a linctus with some fatty substance.

32. For diseases of the eyes. Washed spodium (tutty?) mixed with
grease, and not of a thinner consistence than dough, is to be
carefully triturated, and moistened with the juice of unripe
raisins; and having dried in the sun, moisten until it is of the
consistence of an ointment. When it becomes again dry, let it be
finely levigated, anoint the eyes with it, and dust it upon the angles
of the eyes.

33. For watery eyes. Take one drachm of ebeny and nine oboli of
burnt copper, rub them upon a whetstone, add three oboli of saffron;
triturate all these things reduced to a fine powder, pour in an
Attic hemina of sweet wine, and then place in the sun and cover up;
when sufficiently digested, use it.

34. For violent pains of the eyes. Take of chalcitis, and of raisin,
of each 1 dr., when digested for two days, strain; and pounding
myrrh and saffron, and having mixed must, with these things, digest in
the sun; and with this anoint the eyes when in a state of severe pain.
Let it be kept in a copper vessel.

35. Mode of distinguishing persons in an hysterical fit. Pinch
them with your fingers, and if they feel, it is hysterical; but if
not, it is a convulsion.

36. To persons in coma, (dropsy?) give to drink meconium
(euphorbia peplus?) to the amount of a round Attic leciskion (small
acetabulum).

37. Of squama aeris, as much as three specilla can contain, with the
gluten of summer wheat: levigate, pound, form into pills, and give; it
purges water downwards.

38. A medicine for opening the bowels. Pour upon figs the juice of
spurge, in the proportion of seven to one: then put into a new
vessel and lay past when properly mixed. Give before food.

39. Pounding meconium, pouring on it water, and straining, and
mixing flour, and baking into a cake, with the addition of boiled
honey, give in affections of the anus and in dropsy; and after
eating of it, let the patient drink of a sweet watery wine, and
diluted hydromel prepared from wax: or collecting meconium, lay it
up for medicinal purposes.


────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────

导论：论人的本性 (On the Nature of Man) 与四体液理论
说明：此为 Francis Adams 在《希波克拉底真作》导论中对 De Natura Hominis 的讨论，
详细描述了四体液（血液、黏液、黄胆汁、黑胆汁）理论。
注：该篇独立全文不在维基文库或Project Gutenberg上，此处收录导论中的详细讨论作为补充。
来源：Project Gutenberg eBook #72583
URL: https://www.gutenberg.org/files/72583/72583-0.txt

────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────

【导论节选：论古人的物理哲学与元素学说】

Sect. III.--On the Physical Philosophy of the Ancients,
                     and more especially their Doctrines with
                     regard to the Elements                         107
                   The Pythagoreans                                 108
                   The Platonists                                   110
                   The Peripatetics                                 113
                   The Stoics                                       115
                   The Epicureans                                   116

【导论节选：论人的本性 (On the Nature of Man) - 四体液理论】

XIV. Περὶ φύσεως ἀνθρώπου--_On the Nature of Man_.

Erotian, Galen, Palladius, and Macrobius[160] do not hesitate to
quote the doctrines contained in this treatise as being those of the
great Hippocrates, but its authenticity has long been considered
very questionable, owing to the circumstance that a passage in it of
considerable length, relative to the anatomy of the venous system, is
quoted by Aristotle[161] as being the production of Polybus, and it
is accordingly received as such by Haller,[162] Gruner, Littré, and
most of our recent authorities on ancient medicine. Galen, however,
contends that the passage quoted by Aristotle is not the work either
of Hippocrates or of Polybus, but an interpolation, and that the rest
of the treatise is genuine.[163] But Galen, at the same time, admits
that Dioscorides, the Commentator (he must not be confounded with
the celebrated author of the Materia Medica), had marked the first
part of this treatise with the sign of the obelisk, as indicating his
suspicion of its being spurious, and that he held it to be the work
of Hippocrates, the son of Thessalus, that is to say, of a grandson
of the great Hippocrates. But, whatever may be decided regarding its
authorship, a careful perusal of the treatise will satisfy any one that
it is a piece of patchwork; made up of several fragments, which do not
cohere properly together. It certainly also appears to me that many of
the philosophical dogmata which are delivered in it do not accord well
with the doctrines contained in those treatises which are universally
admitted to be genuine.

After alluding briefly to the opinions of those philosophers who held
that the human body is formed from the four elements, that is to say,
fire, air, water, and earth, the writer proceeds to state his own
doctrines regarding the four humors, namely, blood, phlegm, yellow and
black bile, and the diseases which are occasioned by the prevalence of
one or other of them, according to the seasons of the year, and other
circumstances. The doctrines, as herein stated, are very hypothetical,
and certainly, as already hinted, not in accordance with those
delivered in the genuine works. It is proper to mention, however,
that Galen, in several parts of his works, makes Hippocrates to be
the author of the theories of the elements and of the humors.[164]
The treatise contains certain general truths and rules of practice
not unworthy of some consideration, such as this, that diseases are
cured by their contraries, that is to say, that diseases arising from
repletion are removed by evacuation, and _vice versa_; and that
diseases in general are occasioned either by the food we eat, or the
air we breathe, those which prevail epidemically being produced by the
latter cause. All sudden changes of diet are held to be attended with
danger, and to be avoided. It is also an important rule of practice
that, in venesection, blood should be abstracted from a part as
distant as possible from the seat of the pain and of the collection
of blood. There can be no doubt, in a word, as we have stated in the
preceding section, on the authority of Galen, that Hippocrates was
well acquainted with the principle of revulsion in the practice of
medicine. The natural heat, or, as it is now called, the animal heat,
is stated to be greater the younger the body is--a physiological
doctrine strenuously advocated by Galen in several parts of his works,
but more especially in the treatise “Against Lycus.”[165] The theory
of the formation of urinary calculi is also discussed. The same occurs
in the treatise “De Aëre,” etc., and in the work “De Morbis” (iv.,
28). Allusion is likewise made to the occurrence of substances in the
urine resembling hairs.[166] The last fragment of which this treatise
is composed relates to fevers, the greater part of which are held to be
occasioned by bile. It is said that there are four varieties of them,
namely, synochus, quotidian, tertian and quartan; that the synochus
is formed from the most intense bile, and comes soonest to a crisis,
and the others in the order we have stated them. This is very unlike
the doctrines of fever laid down in the genuine works, and accordingly
this portion of the treatise was a great stumbling-block to those among
the ancient commentators who contended for the genuineness of the
treatise.[167] Altogether, then, I must say, that a careful perusal
of the work leads me to the conclusion that, notwithstanding the high
authorities in its favor, it does not deserve to be received as a
genuine production of Hippocrates.[168]


────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────

On Ancient Medicine (论古代医学)
译者：Francis Adams
来源：Project Gutenberg eBook #72583
URL: https://www.gutenberg.org/files/72583/72583-0.txt

────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────

On Ancient Medicine.
    On the Surgery.
    The Law.
    On Ulcers.
    On Fistulæ.
    On Hemorrhoids.
    On the Sacred Disease.

4. That as it certainly appears that the Book of Prognostics is
composed, in a great measure, from the contents of the First
“Prorrhetics” and the “Coacæ Prænotiones,” there can be little or
no doubt that these two treatises are more ancient than the time of
Hippocrates.

5. That although the exact time at which the Collection, as it now
stands, was made out has never been determined in a very satisfactory
manner, an examination of the contents of the different treatises leads
to the conclusion that most of them represent pretty faithfully the
opinions held by the family of Hippocrates and his immediate successors
in the Coan school of medicine.

6. That a few of them, and more especially the two important works “On
Internal Affections,” and “On Diseases,” would appear to bear distinct
traces of having emanated from the contemporary school of Cnidos.

7. That although the Epistles and certain public documents usually
published at the end of the Collection may justly be suspected of being
spurious, there is undoubted evidence that they are of very ancient
date, and were composed, most probably, within less than a hundred
years after the death of Hippocrates, so that there is every reason for
believing that they relate to real events in the life of our author,
and not to fictitious as some have supposed.




                             SECTION III.

    ON THE PHYSICAL PHILOSOPHY OF THE ANCIENTS, AND MORE ESPECIALLY
             THEIR DOCTRINES WITH REGARD TO THE ELEMENTS.


As it is impossible to understand properly the medical theories which
occur in the Hippocratic treatises without a competent acquaintance
with the Physical Philosophy of the ancients, I have thought it
necessary to devote an entire chapter to an exposition of the tenets
held by the philosophers regarding the elements of things. I might
have been able to dispense with this labor provided there had been any
modern publication to which I could refer the reader for the necessary
information on the subject in question; but, unfortunately, there is no
work in the English language, as far as I am aware, in which the nature
of the ancient doctrines is properly described. To give an example
in point: Dr. Watson, the bishop of Llandaff, in his essay “On the
Transmutability of Water into Earth,” makes the following remarks on
the ancient doctrine concerning the elements: “If but one particle of
water can, by any means, be changed into a particle of earth, the whole
doctrine of the Peripatetic sect concerning the elements of things
will be utterly subverted: the diversities of bodies subsisting in the
universe will no longer be attributed to the different combinations of
earth, air, fire, and water, _as distinct, immutable principles, but
to the different magnitudes, figures, and arrangements of particles of
matter of the same kind_.”[278]

Now it will at once be perceived by any person who is at all
acquainted with modern science, that if the ancient dogmata be as here
represented, they are altogether destitute of any solid foundation in
truth and nature, and we may well wonder that such a baseless structure
should have endured for so long a period. But before passing this
severe judgment on the tenets of our great forefathers in philosophy,
it will be well to investigate their doctrines more accurately than Dr.
Watson appears to have done in this instance.

In pursuing the present investigation, I shall, in the first place,
give literal translations of extracts from the works of the most
celebrated sects of philosophers; namely, the Pythagoreans, Platonists,
Peripatetics, Stoics, and Epicureans. It will, of course, be readily
perceived, from what I have now stated, that I do not mean to confine
my inquiry to the period of ancient philosophy which preceded
Hippocrates, but that I am to bring it down to a pretty late age. This
course I find it indispensably necessary to follow, as I could not
derive sufficient illustration of the subject were I to restrict myself
to the works of the earlier philosophers, who either preceded our
author or were his contemporaries. I shall first give the extracts by
themselves, and then make some remarks in illustration of the doctrines
which they expound. I think it proper to mention further, that I am
answerable for the correctness of the translations in all cases, unless
where it is otherwise stated.


                           THE PYTHAGOREANS.

“Fire being compressed produces air, and air water, and water earth:
and from earth the same circuit of changes takes place till we come to
fire.”[279]

“In that part of the universe where Nature and Generation exert their
powers, it is necessary that there should be these three things: In
the first place, that thing which being tangible furnishes a body to
everything which comes into existence. This is the universal recipient
and substance of impression for things generated, bearing the same
relation to things which are generated from them that water does to
juice, and silence to sound, and darkness to light, and materials
to the things fabricated from them. For water is void of taste and
quality, bearing the same relation to sweet and bitter, and to sharp
and salt. The air is unformed as to sound, or speech, or melody. And
darkness is devoid of color and shape, and bears the same relation
towards bright, and yellow, and white. But white bears reference also
both to the statuary art and that which forms figures of wax. But
matter admits of another comparison with the art of statuary. For
all things exist in it _potentially_ before they are made, but
_actually_ after they are made and have received their nature. In
order, therefore, that there should be generation, it is necessary that
there should be some one substance as a substratum. In the second place
there are the _contraries_, in order that they may be changes and
transmutations, the primary matter undergoing passion and affection, in
order that the qualities (_or_ powers, δυναμεις), being mutually
passive, may not destroy, nor be destroyed, by one another. These (the
contraries) are, heat and cold, moisture and dryness. In the third
place are those substances in which these powers reside, namely, fire
and water, air and earth. For these differ from the powers (qualities?)
For the substances are consumed in place by one another, but the powers
are neither consumed nor formed, for they are the incorporeal reasons
of these.[280] Of these four, heat and cold are causes, and active; but
dryness and humidity are as the materials, and passive. In the first
place there is matter, the universal recipient, for it is the common
subject (_or_ substratum) of all things, so that it is the first
sensible body in potentiality, and the original of all things: next are
the contraries, such as heat and cold, moisture and dryness; and in the
third place there are fire, water, earth, and air: _these all change
into one another_, but the contraries do not change.”[281]

The primary matter is afterwards defined to be “the subject body, that
which receives all the changes, the universal recipient, and that which
potentially is the first to the touch.”[282]

“The first principles of all created things are the substratum, matter,
and the reason of shape; namely, form. The bodies are their offspring,
namely, fire, air, earth, water.”[283]

“Pythagoras taught that the original of all things is the monad, that
from the monad sprung the duad, which is the subject matter to the
efficient monad: that from the monad and infinite duad were formed the
numbers: from the numbers the points; from them the lines, from these
figures of superficies; from the superficies the solid figures; from
these the solid bodies, of which are the elements, fire, water, earth,
air:--_that from these, changed and converted into every shape_,
is formed the world, which is animated, intelligent, of a spherical
shape, comprehending in its middle the earth, which also is spherical
and inhabited all round.[284]

“Pythagoras said, that none of the elements is pure, for that earth
contains fire, and fire air, and water air, etc.”[285]

    “Nor those which elements we call abide,
    Nor to this figure, nor to that are ty’d:
    For this eternal world is said of old
    But four prolific principles to hold,
    Four different bodies: two to heaven ascend,
    And other two down to the centre tend:
    Fire first with wings expanded mounts on high,
    Pure, void of weight, and dwells in upper sky:
    Then air, because unclogged, in empty space
    Flies after fire, and claims the second place;
    But weighty water, as her nature guides,
    Lies on the lap of earth; and mother Earth subsides.
    All things are mixed of these, which all contain,
    And into these are all resolved again:
    Earth rarefies to dew; expanding more
    The subtile dew in air begins to soar:
    Spreads as she flies and weary of the name,
    Extenuates still and changes into flame.
    Thus having by degrees perfection won,
    Restless they soon untwist the web they spun.
    And fire begins to lose her radiant hue,
    Mix’d with gross air, and air descends in dew:
    _And dew condensing does her form forego
    And sinks a heavy lump of earth below_,
    Thus are their figures never at a stand,
    But changed by Nature’s innovating hand.”[286]


                            THE PLATONISTS.

“Let us therefore say that the mother, _or_ receptacle of every
visible, nay of every sensible production, is neither earth, nor air,
nor fire, nor water, nor any of the things which arise out of these,
nor out of which these arise, but a certain invisible and formless
being, the universal recipient, concerning which being, if we say that
it is in a very dubious way intelligible, and something most hard to be
apprehended, we shall not speak false.”[287]

The primary matter “admits of everything, but partakes of no shape
nor resemblance to anything which enters into it. It is the substance
of impression[288] to everything in nature, being moved and altered
by those things which enter into it (_the forms_?), and by their
means it appears sometimes one thing and sometimes another.”[289]

“In the first place, we see that which we call water, being
compressed, become stones and earth. But being dissolved and expanded,
it becomes breath and air. Air, by combustion, is converted into fire,
which, being compressed and extinguished, assumes its original form.
Fire and air meeting together, and being condensed, become cloud and
vapor; and from the condensation of these, running water is formed.
_And from water again, earth and stones are formed._”[290]

Plato taught “that God, matter, and form, are the originals of all
things:--that matter is increate and incorruptible, neither fire, nor
water, nor any of the principles nor elements, but a substance capable
of form and subject to fabrication: that when rude and deprived of
every quality of configuration, God, the artificer, formed the universe
from it. He taught, that matter is the original of all bodies, that it
was stamped with the impression of forms, and hence were produced the
elements, namely, fire, water, earth, and air.”[291]

“Earth contains water, and water, as some suppose, carries earth: air
is formed from water, and from dense air fire is formed.”[292]

“There being four kinds of bodies, by the mutual changes of them
the nature of the world is preserved. _For water is formed from
earth_, and air from water, and ether from air: and then inversely,
from ether, air; from air, water; and from water, earth, which is
lowest in the scale.”[293]

“Those who have investigated matter, if they have formed any right
conception of it, have agreed in considering it as the subject and
receptacle of forms.”[294]

“Concerning the receptacle of bodies this may be said. In the first
place, that there must be a certain substratum to bodies different from
themselves, _is demonstrated by the transmutation of the elements
into one another_. For that which is changed is not altogether
consumed, or, if it is, a substance is changed into a non-entity. And
neither has that which is born come into existence from nothing, but
it has undergone a change from one form into another. For something
remains which has received the new form and cast off the other. And
this is shown by destruction, for it applies only to a compound body;
and, if this be true, every such body is compounded of matter and
form. Induction bears testimony to the truth of this, by showing, that
whatever is dissolved was compounded; and analysis in the same manner,
as, for example, if a phial be resolved into gold, and gold into water;
and water, in like manner, when it perishes, requires to be something
analogous. But the elements must be either form, or primary matter, or
a compound of form and matter. But they cannot be form, for without
matter, how could they be possessed of bulk and magnitude? But they
are not primary matter, for it is not consumed. It follows, then, that
they must consist of form and the primary matter. But form regards
quality and shape, but it (the primary matter) pertains to the subject
which is indeterminate, (ἀόριστον _or_ ἀόρατον) because it is not
form.”[295]

“Matter of itself is devoid of form, matter is the subject of all
things.”[296]

“The followers of Plato and Aristotle are of opinion, that there is
a difference between the first principles and the elements. For, the
elements are compounded, but the first principles are not compounded
nor formed from any thing. What we call the elements are fire, air,
earth, and water; but we call that a principle which has nothing
from which it is formed, since otherwise it is not a principle, but
that from which it is formed. But there is something antecedent to
water and earth, from which they are formed; namely, the first matter
which is devoid of shape and form; then there is form (which we call
_entelocheia_) and privation.”[297]

“Plato, wishing to prove that the elements have one common matter as a
substratum to all, in his ‘Timæus,’ enters into a discussion regarding
their transmutation into one another. But he being well acquainted with
the art of demonstration, has treated properly of the change of the
first bodies into one another. But Thales, Anaximenes, Anaximander,
and Heraclitus, assuming each that there is some one element, endeavor
to prove this from their changing into one another. Yet all these
seem to me to have had an obscure idea (ὀνειράττειν) of some matter,
which is a common substratum to all the elements, and seeing that it
is single they supposed that there is but one element. But instead of
saying that this is a common element from which the others, I mean air,
fire, water, and earth, are formed, they passed it over altogether and
endeavored to demonstrate the same thing of some one of the elements,
all proceeding upon the same mode of demonstration, although they did
not all make choice of the same element.”[298]

“With regard to the old philosophers, called physical, it will be
obvious to us when we read their writings on Nature, that they held the
existence of a first matter which is increate and eternal, being the
substratum to all created and perceptible things.”[299]

“That the elements change into one another is admitted, even by the
followers of Thales, it being so apparent. Hence it is inferred that
the elements have one common matter for a substratum.”[300]

Philo, the platonic Jew of Alexandria, in his treatise “On the
Creation of the World,” thus expresses his opinions regarding the
original state of matter. “Whoever would wish to discover the cause
why this universe was framed, would not be far from the truth, in my
opinion, if he said with one of the ancients, that the Father and Maker
of it is good, and for that reason he spared not to impart of his most
excellent nature to a substance having nothing beautiful in itself, but
possessing the capacity of becoming all things. Of itself it was devoid
of form, quality, and life; and was full of contrariety, confusion, and
dissonance.”

“Moses, the chief of philosophers, and instructed in many of the most
comprehensive secrets of Nature by oracles, was aware that it was
most necessary that there should be in the universe an active cause
and a passive subject. That the active is the most pure and perfect
soul of the universe, more excellent than virtue, more excellent than
knowledge, more excellent than even goodness and beauty. That the
passive is of itself without life and motion, but being moved and
figured, and enlivened by mind, it was changed into a most perfect
work.”[301]

His opinion regarding the elements may be collected from the following
passages:--“Fire being extinguished is converted into thick air, and
air being compressed subsides into water, and water being still more
compressed is changed into earth, the densest of the elements.”[302]

“Nothing that is pure can be comprehended by the senses.”[303]

“The elements are inanimate matter, of itself devoid of motion, and
subjected to the artificer, by whom it is transformed into all kinds of
shapes and qualities.”[304]

I shall venture to give under this head the opinions of one of the
Arabian medical authors.

“It is to be kept in mind that the elements which are perceived by the
senses, namely, fire, air, earth, and water, are by no means the pure
elements, but such as are comprehended by the mind. These are not to be
perceived by the senses. None of the others is pure, nor without some
admixture.”[305]


                           THE PERIPATETICS.

Aristotle defines the first matter as follows: “I call matter the first
subject of everything, all things being formed from it existing in them
not accidentally; and when anything is destroyed, it comes to this at
last.”[306]

In his Logical work he thus defines his ideas regarding the first
substances, namely, mind and matter. “The first substances being
the subjects of all other things, and as every other thing may
be predicated by them and exists in them, are called the prime
substances.[307] “We must distinguish the first bodies from matter,
for we must suppose concerning them that they have a first principle
and origin, namely, matter, which is inseparable from them, and is the
subject of the contraries. For heat does not furnish the materials to
cold, nor it to heat, but the subject to both. So that we have first
the sensible body in potentiality, the first principle; then we have
the contraries, I mean cold and heat; and thirdly, fire and water, and
the like. These change into one another, and not as Empedocles and
others say of them.[308]

“The _material_ of all bodies, great and small, is the same.
This is apparent; for when air is formed from water, the same matter,
when it becomes another thing, acquires nothing new, only that which
formerly existed in capacity now exists actually.”[309]

The following extracts will show the opinions of his most celebrated
commentators:

“Air and fire have one common character, namely, heat; therefore they
readily change into one another. Air and water readily change into
one another, for they have a common character, namely, moisture. In
like manner, water and earth, for they have an alliance, namely,
coldness.”[310]

“The physical philosophers analyze any substance, as, for example,
a man into head, hands, and feet; and these into bones, flesh, and
nerves; and these into the four elements; and these again into matter
and form.”[311]

“Water is formed from air, and air from water, and fire from air,
because they all have one common substratum, matter.”[312]

The next two extracts will show the opinions entertained by Aristotle’s
successor in the Peripatetic school of philosophy.

“Of the simple substances, fire has peculiar powers. _For air, water,
and earth, admit only of changes into one another_, but none of them
can produce itself.”[313]

“The nature of those substances called simple is mixed, and existing in
one another.”[314]

“The Peripatetics divided Nature into two things, the one of which is
efficient, and the other that which furnishes it with the materials
from which anything is made. Power exists in the one, and matter is the
essence of the other.”[315]

“The first principles are air, fire, water, and earth, for from them
are formed all living things and the productions of the earth: they are
therefore called elements; of these, air and fire have the power of
moving and forming the others (I mean water and earth), of receiving
or suffering. Besides these, Aristotle thought that there is a fifth
element, from which the stars and the souls of individuals are made;
but that all these had for a substratum a certain matter devoid of
form and quality, from which all things are framed, a substance which
has a capacity for all things, and admits of all changes, that when it
perishes it is not reduced to nothing, but into its parts, which can be
cut and divided infinitely, since there is nothing in Nature that is
not divisible.”[316]


                              THE STOICS.

“They are of opinion that the first principles of all things are
two--the active and the passive: that the passive is matter, a
being devoid of all qualities; the active, or efficient, is the
reason (λόγος) residing in it, that is, God. That he, being eternal,
fabricates all things from it all (all matter?). That there is a
difference between the first principles and the elements--that the
former are increate and indestructible, whilst the elements are
destructible by burning (ἐκπύρωσιν).--That the first principles are
bodies devoid of form, whereas the elements are possessed of form.
That God and Mind, Fate and Jupiter, are one and the same being under
different appellations; that he formed the four elements, fire, air,
water, earth.”[317]

“Our Stoics say, that there are two principles in Nature from which
all things are formed, namely, cause and matter. That matter lies
inert, a being prepared for all things, but inactive, unless some one
move it.--That cause, that is, reason, forms matter, and changes it at
will. There must be something _by_ which everything is made and
_of_ which it is made: the former is the cause, the latter the
matter.”[318]

“Some of our sect are of opinion that air, being changeable into fire
and water, etc.”[319]

“We are of opinion that earth is changeable. To this we may add that
all things are formed from all things--air from water--water from
air--fire from air--air from fire; _why, then, should not earth be
formed from water, and water from earth?_ Earth is formed from
water--why then not water from earth?”[320]

“The Stoics divided Nature into two things, the one of which is the
efficient, and the other that which furnishes itself as the materials
from which anything is made.”[321]

Suidas says, regarding the first principles: “The first principles of
all things are two, the efficient and the passive. The passive, then,
is a being devoid of qualities--earth, matter. The efficient is the
reason residing in it, namely, God. The principles and elements are
different, inasmuch as the former are increate and indestructible,
while the elements are destructible by burning. Besides, the first
principles are without body and form, but the elements have form.”[322]

“Zeno, the son of Mnaseas, the Citiensian, taught that there are two
principles, God and matter, the one efficient and the other passive;
and that there are four elements.”[323]

“The Stoics maintain that the first principles are two, God and matter;
not that they consider God as an element, but as the active principle,
whilst matter is the passive.”[324]

“Always remember the saying of Heraclitus, _that the dissolution of
earth is to become water, and the dissolution of water to become earth;
and the dissolution of air to become fire, and conversely_.”[325]

“Contemplate the courses of the stars as if carried about with them,
and frequently revolve in your mind the mutual transmutations of the
elements into one another.”[326]

“Acquire the habit of contemplating the transmutation of all things
into one another.”[327]

“Fire, air, water, earth, were so formed by Nature as to furnish
aliment by turns to one another.”[328]


                            THE EPICUREANS.

    “Therefore all those who teach things took their birth
    From simple fire, or water, air, or earth,
    Lie under palpable mistakes. And those
    That teach from doubled elements they rose,
    As air and fire, as earth and water joined,
    Or all four, earth, air, water, fire combined:
    Thus sung Empedocles.

           *       *       *       *       *

    If all things from four elements arose,
    And are again by death dissolved to those:
    What reason we should rather fondly deem
    Them principles of things, than things from them?
    _For they alternately are changed and show
    Each other’s figure and their nature too._”[329]

The following passage will show the opinions of Democritus, the
contemporary and friend of Hippocrates, from whom Epicurus took his
system of physics.[330] “He taught that the atoms are infinite in
magnitude and number, that they revolve in all space, and that thus
they formed _the compound bodies fire, water, air, earth_; for
that even these are composed from the atoms, which are impassive and
unchangeable owing to their hardness.”[331]

These extracts prove clearly that the great philosophers of
antiquity stand acquitted of having held the erroneous opinions
generally ascribed to them respecting the elements of things, and
that nothing can be farther from the truth than the account of the
Peripatetic doctrines given by Dr. Watson. Instead of maintaining,
as he carelessly represents, that “earth, air, fire, and water are
distinct, uncompounded, immutable principles;” they taught, on the
contrary, as we have shown, that all the elements are modifications
of one common substance called the primary matter, and consequently
they held, like himself, that “the elements are different magnitudes,
figures, and arrangements of particles of matter of the same kind.”
This primary matter they demonstrated to be devoid of all quality and
form, but susceptible of all forms and qualities.[332] In the language
of the Peripatetics, it is everything in capacity, but nothing in
actuality. They held that there are two original principles, both
increate and indestructible; the one matter, the universal passive
principle[333]--the material _from_ which all things are formed;
and the other, the efficient cause _by_ which all things are
made:--that the one is possessed of universal privation, and the other
of universal energy:--that it is the one which _impresses_,
and the other which _receives_ the forms of all things. They
maintained that the original materials out of which all objects in the
universe are composed being the same, bodies owe their characteristic
qualities not to their substance, but to their form. The elements,
then, according to the notions of the ancient philosophers, are
the first matter arranged into certain distinguishing forms by the
efficient cause. That form with which solidity is associated they
call earth, under which they ranged all metals, stones, and the like,
for all these they held to be allied to one another in nature, as
well as in the form under which they are presented to our senses.
The next arrangement of created substances is that which constitutes
fluidity, and is called water, under which term they comprehended not
only the native element, but every other modification of matter which
assumes a similar form, namely, all juices of vegetables and fluids
of animals.[334] Some of their earliest speculators in philosophy
maintained that all the materials which compose the universe existed
at one time in this form; and it is curious to reflect that modern
geology has reproduced nearly the same doctrine. The third form of
matter, as presented to our sense of touch, is air, under which the
ancient philosophers comprehended all matter in an aërial state, such
as water converted into vapor, and what are now called gases. Whether
or not they believed the atmosphere which surrounds this earth to be
a homogeneous substance, in nowise affects the general principles of
their philosophy; for it is the same thing, as far as regards their
classification, whether they held that the atmosphere consists of one
or of several distinct combinations of the primary matter with form.
As they were well aware that several distinct modifications of matter
are comprehended under each of the other elements, it can hardly be
doubted that they inferred the like of air; and, indeed, it is quite
apparent from the works of Galen that he knew very well that some
kinds of air are favorable, and others unfavorable to respiration and
combustion.[335] But those phenomena which we ascribe to oxygen gas,
they, without doubt, would have attributed to the operations of some
modification of the element fire. By fire, they meant matter in its
extreme state of tenuity and refinement. Of this elementary principle,
Plato[336] and Theophrastus[337] have enumerated many varieties,
and have speculated regarding their nature with great precision and
acuteness. The ancient philosophers believed that fire is universally
diffused through the universe, being sometimes in a _sensible_,
and sometimes in a _latent_ state; or, as Aristotle expressed it,
heat exists sometimes in capacity, and sometimes in energy.[338] They
attributed the phenomena of lightning to an unequal distribution of
this elemental fire.[339] This is the element with which they supposed
life to be most intimately connected; and, indeed, some of them would
appear to have considered fire as the very essence of the soul. “I
am of opinion,” says the author of one of the Hippocratic treatises,
“that what we call heat is immortal, and understands, sees, and hears
all things that are or will be.”[340] This doctrine, which, to say the
least of it, is not very judiciously expressed in this passage, is thus
corrected by the great master of logic and philosophy: “Some,” says
Aristotle, “improperly call fire or some such power the soul; but it
would be better to say that the soul subsists in such a body, because
heat is, of all bodies, the one most obedient to the operations of the
soul; for to nourish and move are the operations of the soul, and these
she performs by the instrumentality of this power (_or_ quality?).
To say that the soul is fire, is as if one were to call a saw or a
wimble the artisan or his art, because his work is accomplished in
co-operation with these instruments. From this it appears why animals
stand in need of heat.”[341] And in like manner he says, in another of
his works: “Some are of opinion that the nature of fire is plainly the
cause of nourishment and of growth; for it appears to be the only body
or element which nourishes and increases itself. Wherefore one might
suppose that it is this that operates both in plants and in animals.
Yet it is but the co-cause (συνάιτιον); for _it_ is not, properly
speaking, the cause, but rather the soul. For the increase of fire is
indeterminate in so far as it is supplied with fuel. But of natural
substances there is a certain limit and reason (λόγος) of magnitude and
increase. This belongs to the soul rather than to fire, to the reason
rather than to the matter.”[342]

From these observations, coupled with the information supplied in
the preceding extracts, it will be perceived that, although there be,
at first sight, a great discrepancy among physical doctrines of the
ancient philosophers, they differed, in fact, much less than they
would appear to do, only that some of them expressed themselves more
scientifically than others in handling the subject of the elements.
Thus, although Thales seems to hold _water_, and Anaximander
_air_, and Heraclitus _fire_, to be original principles, we
have every reason to believe that, as Galen says (l. c.), even they had
an idea that these are not simple substances, but merely modifications
of one unformed principle, the first matter, from which they conceived
that all bodies in the universe are constructed. Contrary, then, to
what is very generally supposed, it would appear that there was at
bottom no very great difference of opinion between the philosophers
of the Ionic school and those of the other sects, namely, the
Pythagoreans, Platonists, Peripatetics, Stoics, and Epicureans; and
further, that, from the earliest dawn of philosophy, down to the time
when it fell into neglect and came to be misunderstood, the physical
doctrines of the philosophers underwent but little variation.

From the elements, then, constructed in the manner now explained, out
of the primary matter, the ancient philosophers taught that all the
secondary bodies in the universe are formed, and as they maintained the
transmutability of the elements into one another, so, in like manner,
they did not hesitate to proclaim it as a great general truth “that all
things are convertible into all things.”[343] The possibility, then,
of such permutations will not, I presume, be questioned by any one who
has formed correct ideas of the powers of the Great First Cause, and
the capacities of the first subject, Matter, and that such permutations
do actually take place in the course of Nature may be inferred from
many phenomena of daily occurrence in the vegetable and animal world.
It cannot have escaped the most careless observation what changes the
great pabulum, water, undergoes in the process of vegetation--how it
is converted into various woods, and barks, and leaves, and flowers,
all of which are resolvable, by the process of decay, into air, or
reducible into earth. It is also well known that, although a more
unfrequent occurrence, all the solid parts of a tree may undergo a
mutation into rock, that is to say, may become petrified. But it is in
the higher classes of animals that these changes of simple matter admit
of the greatest variety. Let us contemplate for a moment some of the
most remarkable mutations which any article of food (as, for example,
flour-bread), which has been presented to the stomach, is destined
to undergo in the animal frame. We know that the vital powers of the
stomach will convert the starch, of which it principally consists, into
a fluid state, that is to say, into what is called first chyme, and
afterwards, when it has undergone some further change, is denominated
chyle by the physiologists. Having been thus changed, it passes, by a
process about the nature of which physiologists are still strangely
divided in opinion, into certain vessels; and then, in some manner
still less understood, it is converted into a fluid _sui generis_,
called blood, abounding in globules of a singular construction, all
fabricated, no doubt, from the food, but, by some occult process,
which has hitherto defied the skillful manipulation of the chemist,
and the accurate observation of the microscopist, to explain in any
satisfactory manner.[344] And so complete is the transformation that
scarcely one particle of the original food can be detected in the
new product by all the vaunted tests of modern science. But blood is
soon after converted into many other fluid and solid substances--into
bones, cartilages, muscles, and vessels, and into bile, mucus, and
other recrementitious matters, all differing greatly from one another,
both in their appearances and in their properties.[345] And when all
the component parts of the animal frame are constructed, and each
seems to have acquired a determinate structure, should the vital
actions by which they are formed become deranged, we may see the
fair fabric undergo the most wonderful mutations, so that arteries
are converted into bones, and bones into flesh and jelly.[346] So
many and so extraordinary are the changes which a simple alimentary
substance may undergo in the animal frame! And if we admit, with the
ancient philosophers, that every such substance is resolvable into one
or more of the elements, and that all the elements are but different
modifications of one common matter, how wonderful a thing must Form be,
since it imparts such varied appearances and qualities to one common
substratum?

       *       *       *       *       *

In detailing these opinions of the ancient philosophers, it is not my
present business to determine whether they be true or not; my task is
fulfilled, if I have given a distinct and faithful exposition of them,
so that their real import and meaning may be readily comprehended by
the medical reader. I may be allowed to remark, however, that, strange
although that Protean being, the primary matter, may appear to be to
such men of science as are not disposed to recognize the existence of
any substance which cannot be subjected to their senses, and who refuse
to admit the legitimacy of every process of analysis, but what is
conducted in the laboratory of the chemist, opinions similar to those
of the ancient philosophers have been held by some of the most profound
thinkers and distinguished experimentalists of modern times. Thus Lord
Bacon, the reputed father of the inductive philosophy, appears to admit
all the tenets of the ancients regarding the first matter, which,
like them, he considers to have been embodied in the Homeric fable of
Proteus.[347] He says, in reference to it, “that under the person of
Proteus is signified _Matter_, the most ancient of all things,
next to the Deity; that the herd of Proteus was nothing else than the
ordinary species of animals, plants, and metals, into which matter
appears to diffuse, and, as it were, to consume itself; so that, after
it has formed and finished those several species, (its task being,
in a manner, complete,) it appears to sleep and be at rest, nor to
labor at, attempt, or prepare any species farther.”[348] That learned
and accomplished scholar, Mr. Harris, in his work on “Philosophical
Arrangements,” writes thus on the subject we are now treating of:
“Here, then, we have an idea (such as it is) of that singular being,
the Primary Matter, a Being which those philosophers who are immerged
in sensible subjects know not well how to admit, though they cannot
well do without it; a Being which flies the perception of every sense,
and which is at best, even to the intellect, but a negative object, no
otherwise comprehensible than either by analogy or abstraction.

“We gain a glimpse of it by abstraction, when we say that the first
matter is not the lineaments and complexion which make the beautiful
face; nor yet the flesh and blood which make these lineaments and that
complexion; nor yet the liquid and solid aliments, which make that
flesh and blood; nor yet the simple bodies of earth and water, which
make those various aliments; but something which, being below all
these, and supporting them all, is yet different from them all, and
essential to their existence.

“We obtain a sight of it by analogy when we say that, as is the brass
to the statue, the marble to the pillar, the timber to the ship, or
any one secondary matter to any secondary form; so is the First and
Original Matter to all forms in general.”[349]

Nay, the illustrious Sir Isaac Newton would seem, in the following
extract, to countenance the profound speculations of the ancient
philosophers with respect to the elements, and the transmutations of
these substances into one another. He says, “Are not gross bodies and
light (_or_ ether) convertible into one another?--and may not
bodies receive much of their activity from the particles of light
which enter into their composition? The changing of bodies into light
and of light into bodies is very agreeable to the course of Nature,
which seems delighted with permutations. Water, which is a very fluid
tasteless salt, she changes by heat into vapor, a sort of air; and
by cold into ice, which is a hard, pellucid, brittle, fusible stone,
and this stone returns into water by heat, and vapor returns into
water by cold. Earth, by heat, becomes fire, and by cold returns into
earth.”[350]

I may further mention that all the late researches of chemical
philosophers have tended to confirm the tenets of the ancients
regarding the Elements. Thus in that very singular performance “The
Elements of Physiophilosophy,” by Dr. Lorenz Oken, the productions of
the mineral kingdom are classified, very much in accordance with the
ancient arrangement, into four classes, namely, into Earth-earths,
Water-earths, Air-earths, and Fire-earths.[351] It is also well
known that chemical experiment has lately established that several
animal and vegetable substances, such as albumen, fibrin, and casein,
which were formerly looked upon as distinct substances, are all but
modifications of one substance, which is now regarded as the original
of all the tissues; and further, that protein, in every respect
identical with that which forms the basis of the three aforesaid animal
principles, may be obtained from similar elements in the vegetable
kingdom.[352] And if every step which we advance in the knowledge
of the intimate structure of things leads us to contract the number
of substances formerly held to be simple, I would not wonder if it
should yet turn out that oxygen, carbon, hydrogen, and nitrogen are,
like what the ancients held the elements to be--all nothing else but
different modifications of one ever-changing matter. But I will not
indulge further in such speculations, especially as I have reason to
apprehend that I may be thought to be wandering from my own proper
sphere in thus prosecuting researches which may be supposed to have
but a distant bearing on the subject now in hand. I must, however,
be allowed again to repeat my declaration that it is impossible to
comprehend the theories contained in the Hippocratic treatises without
a proper acquaintance with the Physical Philosophy of the ancients,
and that these principles have been misapprehended and misrepresented
most unaccountably by modern writers, so as to occasion corresponding
mistakes with regard to ancient medicine. I trust, then, that my
present labors will not be ineffectual in preventing such mistakes
in future; though, at the same time, knowing, as I well do, the
practical bent of British science at the present day, I cannot but be
apprehensive that a certain portion of my readers will lend a deaf ear
to speculative opinions, of which they cannot recognize the importance,
and will be disposed to discard the doctrines of the ancient
philosophers, before they have rightly comprehended their import:

    “Nec mea dona tibi studio comporta fideli
    Intellecta prius quam sint, contempta relinquas.”[353]

I am sensible, too, that I may have just reason to suspect that I
still retain a too partial fondness for the fascinating studies in
which I indulged at one period, beyond what, perhaps, was prudent in
a physician, and that it would have been better for me if I had taken
a lesson from the mythical hero of the “Odyssey,” and had resisted
the enchanting voice of the ancient Siren when she sought to allure
me from the active duties of a professional life, with the confident
assurance that I should leave her “much delighted, and with an increase
of knowledge.”[354]

       *       *       *       *       *

Before concluding, I will briefly recapitulate the results to which our
present inquiry has conducted us:--

1st. That many of the medical theories which occur in the Hippocratic
treatises are founded on the physical philosophy of the ancients, and
more particularly on their doctrines, with regard to the elements of
things.

2d. That all the great sects of the ancient philosophers held that the
four elements, namely, fire, air, earth, and water, are transmutable
into one another, being all of a homogeneous nature, and based on one
common substratum, namely, the primary matter.

3d. That, by reasoning from observation and analogy, the ancient
philosophers arrived at the conclusion that this primary matter is a
substance devoid of all qualities and forms, but susceptible of all
forms and qualities.

4th. That although certain of the philosophers, the contemporaries
and predecessors of Hippocrates, appear to hold that some one of the
elements, such as fire and water, was the original of all things, even
these had an idea, although not expressed by them in a definite manner,
of a first matter, which serves as a basis to all the elements.

5th. That these doctrines of the ancient philosophers, whether well
founded or not, are countenanced by many eminent names in modern
literature and philosophy.

6th. That the opinion generally entertained regarding the doctrines
of the ancient philosophers on this subject is altogether erroneous.




                       THE WORKS OF HIPPOCRATES.

                         ON ANCIENT MEDICINE.


                             THE ARGUMENT.

Although, as stated in the second section of the Preliminary
Discourse, the evidence in support of this treatise be unfortunately
not such as clearly to establish its genuineness, all who read it
with attention must admit that it is replete with important matters,
and that if not the production of Hippocrates, it is not unworthy of
his high reputation. Notwithstanding, then, that I am by no means
so well convinced as M. Littré is, that the work is genuine, I have
not hesitated to follow his example in placing it at the head of the
list, as the nature of its contents is such as to form an excellent
introduction to the study of the Hippocratic medicine.

It contains, as M. Littré remarks, a polemic, a method, and a system.
The polemic is directed against those of his predecessors who had
corrupted medicine by introducing hypotheses into it as the causes
of disease, such as heat, cold, moisture, and dryness. These it will
be seen that he combats with great force of argument and clearness
of illustration. The philosophical dogmas to which he is supposed to
refer in this place are those of the section of Pythagoreans, called
the Eleatic, who would appear to have held nearly the same opinions
as Pythagoras himself with regard to the elements.[355] But, in
fact, as I trust I have clearly made out in the third section of the
Preliminary Discourse, all the ancient philosophers held substantially
the same opinion regarding the elements, although they did not all
express themselves in the same terms. It is of little consequence,
then, to attempt to find out what particular class of philosophers our
author directs his attack against, it being sufficient to say that
he decidedly condemns the practice of founding the rules of medical
practice on hypothesis.[356] I may here remark, that the censure thus
bestowed on hypothetical systems applies to modern times as well as to
ancient, to those who proclaim theories by which, like Broussais, they
account for all diseases upon figments which they call inflammations,
and those who, like Cullen, attribute most diseases to spasms. We may
rest assured, from the sensible observations which Hippocrates makes on
this subject in the present work, that the causes of all diseases are
realities, provided we could find them out, and that they are not vague
abstractions, as the authors of these hypotheses suppose.

His method of cultivating medicine is founded on an attentive
examination of all the circumstances connected with real life, and his
system consists in studying the condition of the humors in the body,
their origin, their coction, and their disappearance.

The most prominent feature, however, in the contents of this little
treatise is the practical view which is here given of the origin of
medicine, namely, from the necessities and weaknesses of the human
race. The author clearly makes it out that Medicine is, as it were, a
corollary to Dietetics. Nothing of the kind can well be imagined more
ingenious and original than his observations and reasonings on this
head in the introductory sections to this treatise. See in particular §
5.

The remarks in refutation of the hypothesis of cold, heat, moist, and
dry, are very interesting. (§ 13.)

The reflections on the origin of fevers and inflammations are very just
and original, but would appear not to have been properly appreciated by
his successors; for among all the ancient authors who have treated of
fevers, there is, perhaps, no one but himself who has stated in decided
terms that there is something more in a fever than a mere increase of
the innate (_or_ animal) heat. See the Commentary on PAULUS
ÆGINETA, B. II., 1.

The remarks on the effects of the cold bath at § 16 are much to the
purpose, and deserve attention.

The observations on rheums _or_ defluxions (§ 19) are also very
striking, and even at the present day, after the many vicissitudes of
medical theory which we have gone through, it would be difficult to
deny that the opinions here advanced are well founded. At all events
they must be allowed to be highly interesting, as containing the first
germ of a theory which long flourished in the schools of medicine.

At § 20 the author seems to hold that philosophy is not so necessary
to medicine as medicine is to philosophy. Schulze, with a considerable
show of reason, argues that Celsus had this passage in view when he
pronounced, concerning Hippocrates, that he was the first person
who separated medicine from philosophy. (Hist. Med. I., 3, i., 26.)
Schulze contends that what Celsus meant was, that Hippocrates discarded
_à priori_ arguments in medicine, and drew all his inferences
from actual observation. This would appear to me the most plausible
interpretation which has ever been given to this celebrated passage
in the preface of Celsus. Philosophy, then, it would appear, freed
medicine from the delusions of superstition, by substituting the errors
of hypothesis in their place, and the important office which he who was
called the Father of Medicine conferred upon the art was by discarding
both superstition and hypothesis, and substituting the results of
actual observation in the room of both.

From § 22 to the end of the work the author gives important
observations on the modifications which diseases undergo in connection
with the peculiar organization of the part in which they are situated.
It may well be doubted whether the remarks and reflections herein
contained have ever obtained all the attention which they merit.

The style of this piece is certainly elegant and beautiful; and it is
proper to mention that the text is remarkably improved in M. Littré’s
edition. In all the previous editions it was more corrupt than that of
almost any other of the Hippocratic treatises.

The following remarks of M. Littré on the present work appear to me so
just, and are so elegantly expressed, that I cannot deny myself the
pleasure of introducing them here in the original:

“En résumé, le livre de _l’Ancienne Médecine_ donne une idée
des problèmes agités du temps d’Hippocrate, et de la manière donts
ils étaient débattus. Il s’agissait, dans la plus grande généralité
de la pathologie de déterminer la cause des maladies ou, en d’autres
termes, de poser les bases d’un système de médecine. Certains médecins
disaient que cette cause, étant une, résidait dans une propriété unique
du corps, propriété qu’ils spécifiaient. Hippocrate répétait qu’en
fait, cela était en contradiction avec l’expérience, qu’en principe
une hypothèse était suspecte et stérile, et qu’il n’y avait de sureté
que dans l’études des faits et dans la tradition de la science qui y
ramene. Ainsi, quatre cents ans avant J. C., on essayait de rattacher
toute la médecine à une seule propriété hypothétique, comme on l’a
essayé de nos jours; mais cette propriété était ou le chaud, ou le
froid, ou l’humide, ou le sec. Quatre cents ans avant J. C., un esprit
sévère et éclairé combattait de telles opinions au nom de l’expérience,
montrait que les causes des maladies ne pouvant pas se ramener à
une seule, le champ de la pathologie générale était bien plus vaste
qu’on ne croyait; et formulait ce que l’observation lui avait permis
de conclure; mais sa conclusion n’embrasse guère que la trouble dans
le mélange des humeurs, que leur coction et leurs crises. Depuis
lors, la méthode de ceux qu’Hippocrate avait combattus, et la méthode
d’Hippocrate, l’hypothèse et l’observation se sont perpétuées, ainsi
que le témoigne l’histoire de la médecine, mais ce ne sont plus ni
l’ancienne hypothèse, ni l’ancienne observation.

“Il est certainement instructif d’étudier, dans le cours du temps, les
problèmes tels qu’ils ont été posés, et les discussions qu’ils ont
soulevées. On le voit, la science antique a de grandes ressemblances
avec la science moderne; dès l’époque que nous sommes forcés de
regarder comme l’aurore de la médecine, dès les premiers monuments
que nous possédons, les questions fondamentales sont débattues, et
les limites de l’esprit humain sont touchées. Mais en dedans de
ces limites, la science trouve, dans une immensité inépuisable de
combinaisons, les matériaux qui la font grandir; et il est impossible
de ne pas reconnaître que, sur un sol et avec les aliments que lui
fournissent les choses et l’expérience, elle se développe en vertu d’un
principe interne de vie, qui reside dans l’enchaînement nécessaire de
son développement successif.”[357]


                         ON ANCIENT MEDICINE.

1. Whoever having undertaken to speak or write on Medicine, have first
laid down for themselves some hypothesis to their argument, such as
hot, or cold, or moist, or dry, or whatever else they choose (thus
reducing their subject within a narrow compass, and supposing only
one or two original causes of diseases or of death among mankind),
are all clearly mistaken in much that they say; and this is the more
reprehensible as relating to an art which all men avail themselves
of on the most important occasions, and the good operators and
practitioners in which they hold in especial honor. For there are
practitioners, some bad and some far otherwise, which, if there had
been no such thing as Medicine, and if nothing had been investigated
or found out in it, would not have been the case, but all would have
been equally unskilled and ignorant of it, and everything concerning
the sick would have been directed by chance. But now it is not so;
for, as in all the other arts, those who practise them differ much
from one another in dexterity and knowledge, so is it in like manner
with Medicine. Wherefore I have not thought that it stood in need of
an empty hypothesis, like those subjects which are occult and dubious,
in attempting to handle which it is necessary to use some hypothesis;
as, for example, with regard to things above us and things below the
earth;[358] if any one should treat of these and undertake to declare
how they are constituted, the reader or hearer could not find out,
whether what is delivered be true or false; for there is nothing which
can be referred to in order to discover the truth.

2. But all these requisites belong of old to Medicine, and an origin
and way have been found out, by which many and elegant discoveries
have been made, during a length of time, and others will yet be found
out, if a person possessed of the proper ability, and knowing those
discoveries which have been made, should proceed from them to prosecute
his investigations. But whoever, rejecting and despising all these,
attempts to pursue another course and form of inquiry, and says he has
discovered anything, is deceived himself and deceives others, for the
thing is impossible. And for what reason it is impossible, I will now
endeavor to explain, by stating and showing what the art really is.
From this it will be manifest that discoveries cannot possibly be made
in any other way. And most especially, it appears to me, that whoever
treats of this art should treat of things which are familiar to the
common people. For of nothing else will such a one have to inquire
or treat, but of the diseases under which the common people have
labored, which diseases and the causes of their origin and departure,
their increase and decline, illiterate persons cannot easily find out
themselves, but still it is easy for them to understand these things
when discovered and expounded by others. For it is nothing more than
that every one is put in mind of what had occurred to himself. But
whoever does not reach the capacity of the illiterate vulgar and fails
to make them listen to him, misses his mark. Wherefore, then, there is
no necessity for any hypothesis.

3. For the art of Medicine would not have been invented at first, nor
would it have been made a subject of investigation (for there would
have been no need of it), if when men are indisposed, the same food and
other articles of regimen which they eat and drink when in good health
were proper for them, and if no others were preferable to these. But
now necessity itself made medicine to be sought out and discovered by
men, since the same things when administered to the sick, which agreed
with them when in good health, neither did nor do agree with them. But
to go still further back, I hold that the diet and food which people in
health now use would not have been discovered, provided it had suited
with man to eat and drink in like manner as the ox, the horse, and all
other animals, except man, do of the productions of the earth, such
as fruits, weeds, and grass; for from such things these animals grow,
live free of disease, and require no other kind of food. And, at first,
I am of opinion that man used the same sort of food, and that the
present articles of diet had been discovered and invented only after a
long lapse of time. For when they suffered much and severely from this
strong and brutish diet, swallowing things which were raw, unmixed,
and possessing great strength, they became exposed to strong pains and
diseases, and to early deaths. It is likely, indeed, that from habit
they would suffer less from these things then than we would now, but
still they would suffer severely even then; and it is likely that the
greater number, and those who had weaker constitutions, would all
perish; whereas the stronger would hold out for a longer time, as even
nowadays some, in consequence of using strong articles of food, get
off with little trouble, but others with much pain and suffering. From
this necessity it appears to me that they would search out the food
befitting their nature, and thus discover that which we now use: and
that from wheat, by macerating it, stripping it of its hull, grinding
it all down, sifting, toasting, and baking it, they formed bread;[359]
and from barley they formed cake (maza),[360] performing many
operations in regard to it; they boiled, they roasted, they mixed, they
diluted those things which are strong and of intense qualities with
weaker things, fashioning them to the nature and powers of man, and
considering that the stronger things Nature would not be able to manage
if administered, and that from such things pains, diseases, and death
would arise, but such as Nature could manage, that from them food,
growth, and health, would arise. To such a discovery and investigation
what more suitable name could one give than that of Medicine? since it
was discovered for the health of man, for his nourishment and safety,
as a substitute for that kind of diet by which pains, diseases, and
deaths were occasioned.

4. And if this is not held to be an art, I do not object. For it is not
suitable to call any one an artist of that which no one is ignorant of,
but which all know from usage and necessity. But still the discovery is
a great one, and requiring much art and investigation. Wherefore those
who devote themselves to gymnastics and training, are always making
some new discovery, by pursuing the same line of inquiry, where, by
eating and drinking certain things, they are improved and grow stronger
than they were.[361]

5. Let us inquire then regarding what is admitted to be Medicine;
namely, that which was invented for the sake of the sick, which
possesses a name and practitioners, whether it also seeks to accomplish
the same objects, and whence it derived its origin. To me, then, it
appears, as I said at the commencement, that nobody would have sought
for medicine at all, provided the same kinds of diet had suited with
men in sickness as in good health. Wherefore, even yet, such races of
men as make no use of medicine, namely, barbarians, and even certain
of the Greeks, live in the same way when sick as when in health; that
it to say, they take what suits their appetite, and neither abstain
from, nor restrict themselves in anything for which they have a desire.
But those who have cultivated and invented medicine, having the same
object in view as those of whom I formerly spoke, in the first place,
I suppose, diminished the quantity of the articles of food which they
used, and this alone would be sufficient for certain of the sick, and
be manifestly beneficial to them, although not to all, for there would
be some so affected as not to be able to manage even small quantities
of their usual food, and as such persons would seem to require
something weaker, they invented soups, by mixing a few strong things
with much water, and thus abstracting that which was strong in them by
dilution and boiling. But such as could not manage even soups, laid
them aside, and had recourse to drinks, and so regulated them as to
mixture and quantity, that they were administered neither stronger nor
weaker than what was required.

6. But this ought to be well known, that soups do not agree with
certain persons in their diseases, but, on the contrary, when
administered both the fevers and the pains are exacerbated, and it
becomes obvious that what was given has proved food and increase to the
disease, but a wasting and weakness to the body. But whatever persons
so affected partook of solid food, or cake, or bread, even in small
quantity, would be ten times and more decidedly injured than those who
had taken soups, for no other reason than from the strength of the food
in reference to the affection: and to whomsoever it is proper to take
soups and not eat solid food, such a one will be much more injured
if he eat much than if he eat little, but even little food will be
injurious to him. But all the causes of the sufferance refer themselves
to this rule, that the strongest things most especially and decidedly
hurt man, whether in health or in disease.

7. What other object, then, had he in view who is called a physician,
and is admitted to be a practitioner of the art, who found out the
regimen and diet befitting the sick, than he who originally found
out and prepared for all mankind that kind of food which we all now
use, in place of the former savage and brutish mode of living? To me
it appears that the mode is the same, and the discovery of a similar
nature. The one sought to abstract those things which the constitution
of man cannot digest, because of their wildness and intemperature, and
the other those things which are beyond the powers of the affection in
which any one may happen to be laid up. Now, how does the one differ
from the other, except that the latter admits of greater variety, and
requires more application, whereas the former was the commencement of
the process?

8. And if one would compare the diet of sick persons with that of
persons in health, he will find it not more injurious than that of
healthy persons in comparison with that of wild beasts and of other
animals. For, suppose a man laboring under one of those diseases which
are neither serious and unsupportable, nor yet altogether mild, but
such as that, upon making any mistake in diet, it will become apparent,
as if he should eat bread and flesh, or any other of those articles
which prove beneficial to healthy persons, and that, too, not in great
quantity, but much less than he could have taken when in good health;
and that another man in good health, having a constitution neither
very feeble, nor yet strong, eats of those things which are wholesome
and strengthening to an ox or a horse, such as vetches, barley, and
the like, and that, too, not in great quantity, but much less than he
could take; the healthy person who did so would be subjected to no
less disturbance and danger than the sick person who took bread or
cake unseasonably. All these things are proofs that Medicine is to be
prosecuted and discovered by the same method as the other.

9. And if it were simply, as is laid down, that such things as are
stronger prove injurious, but such as are weaker prove beneficial and
nourishing, both to sick and healthy persons, it were an easy matter,
for then the safest rule would be to circumscribe the diet to the
lowest point. But then it is no less mistake, nor one that injures
a man less, provided a deficient diet, or one consisting of weaker
things than what are proper, be administered. For, in the constitution
of man, abstinence may enervate, weaken, and kill. And there are many
other ills, different from those of repletion, but no less dreadful,
arising from deficiency of food; wherefore the practice in those cases
is more varied, and requires greater accuracy. For one must aim at
attaining a certain measure, and yet this measure admits neither weight
nor calculation of any kind, by which it may be accurately determined,
unless it be the sensation of the body; wherefore it is a task to
learn this accurately, so as not to commit small blunders either on
the one side or the other, and in fact I would give great praise to
the physician whose mistakes are small, for perfect accuracy is seldom
to be seen, since many physicians seem to me to be in the same plight
as bad pilots, who, if they commit mistakes while conducting the ship
in a calm do not expose themselves, but when a storm and violent
hurricane overtake them, they then, from their ignorance and mistakes,
are discovered to be what they are, by all men, namely, in losing their
ship. And thus bad and commonplace physicians, when they treat men who
have no serious illness, in which case one may commit great mistakes
without producing any formidable mischief, (and such complaints
occur much more frequently to men than dangerous ones); under these
circumstances, when they commit mistakes, they do not expose themselves
to ordinary men; but when they fall in with a great, a strong, and
a dangerous disease, then their mistakes and want of skill are made
apparent to all. Their punishment is not far off, but is swift in
overtaking both the one and the other.[362]

10. And that no less mischief happens to a man from unseasonable
depletion than from repletion, may be clearly seen upon reverting to
the consideration of persons in health. For, to some, with whom it
agrees to take only one meal in the day, and they have arranged it so
accordingly; whilst others, for the same reason, also take dinner, and
this they do because they find it good for them, and not like those
persons who, for pleasure or from any casual circumstance, adopt the
one or the other custom: and to the bulk of mankind it is of little
consequence which of these rules they observe, that is to say, whether
they make it a practice to take one or two meals. But there are certain
persons who cannot readily change their diet with impunity; and if they
make any alteration in it for one day, or even for a part of a day,
are greatly injured thereby. Such persons, provided they take dinner
when it is not their wont, immediately become heavy and inactive,
both in body and mind, and are weighed down with yawning, slumbering,
and thirst; and if they take supper in addition, they are seized with
flatulence, tormina, and diarrhœa, and to many this has been the
commencement of a serious disease, when they have merely taken twice
in a day the same food which they have been in the custom of taking
once. And thus, also, if one who has been accustomed to dine, and
this rule agrees with him, should not dine at the accustomed hour, he
will straightway feel great loss of strength, trembling, and want of
spirits, the eyes of such a person will become more pallid, his urine
thick and hot, his mouth bitter; his bowels will seem, as it were,
to hang loose; he will suffer from vertigo, lowness of spirit, and
inactivity,--such are the effects; and if he should attempt to take
at supper the same food which he was wont to partake of at dinner,
it will appear insipid, and he will not be able to take it off; and
these things, passing downwards with tormina and rumbling, burn up his
bowels; he experiences insomnolency or troubled and disturbed dreams;
and to many of them these symptoms are the commencement of some disease.

11. But let us inquire what are the causes of these things which
happened to them. To him, then, who was accustomed to take only one
meal in the day, they happened because he did not wait the proper time,
until his bowels had completely derived benefit from and had digested
the articles taken at the preceding meal, and until his belly had
become soft, and got into a state of rest, but he gave it a new supply
while in a state of heat and fermentation, for such bellies digest much
more slowly, and require more rest and ease. And as to him who had
been accustomed to dinner, since, as soon as the body required food,
and when the former meal was consumed, and he wanted refreshment, no
new supply was furnished to it, he wastes and is consumed from want of
food. For all the symptoms which I describe as befalling to this man I
refer to want of food. And I also say that all men who, when in a state
of health, remain for two or three days without food, experience the
same unpleasant symptoms as those which I described in the case of him
who had omitted to take dinner.

12. Wherefore, I say, that such constitutions as suffer quickly and
strongly from errors in diet, are weaker than others that do not; and
that a weak person is in a state very nearly approaching to one in
disease; but a person in disease is the weaker, and it is, therefore,
more likely that he should suffer if he encounters anything that is
unseasonable. It is difficult, seeing that there is no such accuracy
in the Art, to hit always upon what is most expedient, and yet many
cases occur in medicine which would require this accuracy, as we shall
explain. But on that account, I say, we ought not to reject the ancient
Art, as if it were not, and had not been properly founded, because it
did not attain accuracy in all things, but rather, since it is capable
of reaching to the greatest exactitude by reasoning, to receive it and
admire its discoveries, made from a state of great ignorance, and as
having been well and properly made, and not from chance.

13. But I wish the discourse to revert to the new method of those
who prosecute their inquiries in the Art by hypothesis. For if hot,
or cold, or moist, or dry, be that which proves injurious to man, and
if the person who would treat him properly must apply cold to the
hot, hot to the cold, moist to the dry, and dry to the moist--let me
be presented with a man, not indeed one of a strong constitution, but
one of the weaker, and let him eat wheat, such as it is supplied from
the thrashing-floor, raw and unprepared, with raw meat, and let him
drink water. By using such a diet I know that he will suffer much and
severely, for he will experience pains, his body will become weak, and
his bowels deranged, and he will not subsist long. What remedy, then,
is to be provided for one so situated? Hot? or cold? or moist? or dry?
For it is clear that it must be one or other of these. For, according
to this principle, if it is one of these which is injuring the patient,
it is to be removed by its contrary. But the surest and most obvious
remedy is to change the diet which the person used, and instead of
wheat to give bread, and instead of raw flesh, boiled, and to drink
wine in addition to these: for by making these changes it is impossible
but that he must get better, unless completely disorganized by time and
diet. What, then, shall we say? whether that, as he suffered from cold,
these hot things being applied were of use to him, or the contrary? I
should think this question must prove a puzzler to whomsoever it is
put. For whether did he who prepared bread out of wheat remove the hot,
the cold, the moist, or the dry principle in it?--for the bread is
consigned both to fire and to water, and is wrought with many things,
each of which has its peculiar property and nature, some of which it
loses, and with others it is diluted and mixed.

14. And this I know, moreover, that to the human body it makes a great
difference whether the bread be fine or coarse;[363] of wheat with or
without the hull, whether mixed with much or little water, strongly
wrought or scarcely at all, baked or raw--and a multitude of similar
differences; and so, in like manner, with the cake (maza); the powers
of each, too, are great, and the one nowise like the other. Whoever
pays no attention to these things, or, paying attention, does not
comprehend them, how can he understand the diseases which befall a
man? For, by every one of these things, a man is affected and changed
this way or that, and the whole of his life is subjected to them,
whether in health, convalescence, or disease. Nothing else, then, can
be more important or more necessary to know than these things. So that
the first inventors, pursuing their investigations properly, and by a
suitable train of reasoning, according to the nature of man, made their
discoveries, and thought the Art worthy of being ascribed to a god, as
is the established belief. For they did not suppose that the dry or
the moist, the hot or the cold, or any of these, are either injurious
to man, or that man stands in need of them; but whatever in each was
strong, and more than a match for a man’s constitution, whatever he
could not manage, that they held to be hurtful, and sought to remove.
Now, of the sweet, the strongest is that which is intensely sweet; of
the bitter, that which is intensely bitter; of the acid, that which
is intensely acid; and of all things that which is extreme, for these
things they saw both existing in man, and proving injurious to him.
For there is in man the bitter and the salt, the sweet and the acid,
the sour and the insipid,[364] and a multitude of other things having
all sorts of powers both as regards quantity and strength. These, when
all mixed and mingled up with one another, are not apparent, neither
do they hurt a man; but when any of them is separate, and stands by
itself, then it becomes perceptible, and hurts a man. And thus, of
articles of food, those which are unsuitable and hurtful to man when
administered, every one is either bitter, or intensely so, or saltish
or acid, or something else intense and strong, and therefore we are
disordered by them in like manner as we are by the secretions in the
body. But all those things of which a man eats and drinks are devoid
of any such intense and well-marked quality, such as bread, cake, and
many other things of a similar nature which man is accustomed to use
for food, with the exception of condiments and confectionaries, which
are made to gratify the palate and for luxury. And from those things,
when received into the body abundantly, there is no disorder nor
dissolution of the powers belonging to the body; but strength, growth,
and nourishment result from them, and this for no other reason than
because they are well mixed, have nothing in them of an immoderate
character, nor anything strong, but the whole forms one simple and not
strong substance.

15. I cannot think in what manner they who advance this doctrine,
and transfer the Art from the cause I have described to hypothesis,
will cure men according to the principle which they have laid down.
For, as far as I know, neither the hot nor the cold, nor the dry, nor
the moist, has ever been found unmixed with any other quality; but I
suppose they use the same articles of meat and drink as all we other
men do. But to this substance they give the attribute of being hot, to
that cold, to that dry, and to that moist. Since it would be absurd to
advise the patient to take something hot, for he would straightway ask
what it is? so that he must either play the fool, or have recourse to
some one of the well-known substances: and if this hot thing happen
to be sour, and that hot thing insipid, and this hot thing has the
power of raising a disturbance in the body (and there are many other
kinds of heat, possessing many opposite powers), he will be obliged
to administer some one of them, either the hot and the sour, or the
hot and the insipid, or that which, at the same time, is cold and sour
(for there is such a substance), or the cold and the insipid. For, as
I think, the very opposite effects will result from either of these,
not only in man, but also in a bladder, a vessel of wood, and in many
other things possessed of far less sensibility than man; for it is not
the heat which is possessed of great efficacy, but the sour and the
insipid, and other qualities as described by me, both in man and out
of man, and that whether eaten or drunk, rubbed in externally, and
otherwise applied.

16. But I think that of all the qualities heat and cold exercise the
least operation in the body, for these reasons: as long time as hot
and cold are mixed up with one another they do not give trouble, for
the cold is attempered and rendered more moderate by the hot, and
the hot by the cold; but when the one is wholly separate from the
other, then it gives pain; and at that season when cold is applied it
creates some pain to a man, but quickly, for that very reason, heat
spontaneously arises in him without requiring any aid or preparation.
And these things operate thus both upon men in health and in disease.
For example, if a person in health wishes to cool his body during
winter, and bathes either in cold water or in any other way, the more
he does this, unless his body be fairly congealed, when he resumes his
clothes and comes into a place of shelter, his body becomes more heated
than before. And thus, too, if a person wish to be warmed thoroughly
either by means of a hot bath or strong fire, and straightway having
the same clothing on, takes up his abode again in the place he was in
when he became congealed, he will appear much colder, and more disposed
to chills than before. And if a person fan himself on account of a
suffocating heat, and having procured refrigeration for himself in this
manner, cease doing so, the heat and suffocation will be ten times
greater in his case than in that of a person who does nothing of the
kind. And, to give a more striking example, persons travelling in the
snow, or otherwise in rigorous weather, and contracting great cold in
their feet, their hands, or their head, what do they not suffer from
inflammation and tingling when they put on warm clothing and get into
a hot place? In some instances, blisters arise as if from burning with
fire, and they do not suffer from any of those unpleasant symptoms
until they become heated. So readily does either of these pass into
the other; and I could mention many other examples. And with regard
to the sick, is it not in those who experience a rigor that the most
acute fever is apt to break out? And yet not so strongly neither,
but that it ceases in a short time, and, for the most part, without
having occasioned much mischief; and while it remains, it is hot,
and passing over the whole body, ends for the most part in the feet,
where the chills and cold were most intense and lasted longest: and,
when sweat supervenes, and the fever passes off, the patient is much
colder than if he had not taken the fever at all. Why then should that
which so quickly passes into the opposite extreme, and loses its own
powers spontaneously, be reckoned a mighty and serious affair? And what
necessity is there for any great remedy for it?

17. One might here say--but persons in ardent fevers, pneumonia, and
other formidable diseases, do not quickly get rid of the heat, nor
experience these rapid alterations of heat and cold. And I reckon this
very circumstance the strongest proof that it is not from heat simply
that men get into the febrile state, neither is it the sole cause of
the mischief, but that this species of heat is bitter, and that acid,
and the other saltish, and many other varieties; and again there is
cold combined with other qualities. These are what proves injurious:
heat, it is true, is present also, possessed of strength as being that
which conducts, is exacerbated and increased along with the other, but
has no power greater than what is peculiar to itself.

18. With regard to these symptoms, in the first place those are most
obvious of which we have all often had experience. Thus, then, in such
of us as have a coryza and defluction from the nostrils, this discharge
is much more acrid than that which formerly was formed in and ran from
them daily; and it occasions swelling of the nose, and it inflames,
being of a hot and extremely ardent nature, as you may know, if you
apply your hand to the place; and, if the disease remains long, the
part becomes ulcerated although destitute of flesh and hard; and the
heat in the nose ceases, not when the defluxion takes place and the
inflammation is present, but when the running becomes thicker and less
acrid, and more mixed with the former secretion, then it is that the
heat ceases. But in all those cases in which this decidedly proceeds
from cold alone, without the concourse of any other quality, there is
a change from cold to hot, and from hot to cold, and these quickly
supervene, and require no coction. But all the others being connected,
as I have said, with acrimony and intemperance of humors, pass off in
this way by being mixed and concocted.

19. But such defluxions as are determined to the eyes being possessed
of strong and varied acrimonies, ulcerate the eyelids, and in some
cases corrode the cheeks and parts below the eyes upon which the flow,
and even occasion rupture and erosion of the tunic which surrounds
the eyeball. But pain, heat, and extreme burning prevail until the
defluxions are concocted and become thicker, and concretions form about
the eyes, and the coction takes place from the fluids being mixed up,
diluted, and digested together. And in defluxions upon the throat,
from which are formed hoarseness, cynanche, erysipelas, and pneumonia,
all these have at first saltish, watery, and acrid discharges, and
with these the diseases gain strength. But when the discharges become
thicker, more concocted, and are freed from all acrimony, then, indeed,
the fevers pass away, and the other symptoms which annoyed the patient;
for we must account those things the cause of each complaint, which,
being present in a certain fashion, the complaint exists, but it ceases
when they change to another combination. But those which originate from
pure heat or cold, and do not participate in any other quality, will
then cease when they undergo a change from cold to hot, and from hot to
cold; and they change in the manner I have described before. Wherefore,
all the other complaints to which man is subject arise from powers
(qualities?). Thus, when there is an overflow of the bitter principle,
which we call yellow bile, what anxiety, burning heat, and loss of
strength prevail! but if relieved from it, either by being purged
spontaneously, or by means of a medicine seasonably administered, the
patient is decidedly relieved of the pains and heat; but while these
things float on the stomach, unconcocted and undigested, no contrivance
could make the pains and fever cease; and when there are acidities of
an acrid and æruginous character, what varieties of frenzy, gnawing
pains in the bowels and chest, and inquietude, prevail! and these
do not cease until the acidities be purged away, or are calmed down
and mixed with other fluids. The coction, change, attenuation, and
thickening into the form of humors, take place through many and
various forms; therefore the crises and calculations of time are of
great importance in such matters; but to all such changes hot and cold
are but little exposed, for these are neither liable to putrefaction
nor thickening. What then shall we say of the change? that it is a
combination (crasis) of these humors having different powers toward one
another. But the hot does not lose its heat when mixed with any other
thing except the cold; nor again, the cold, except when mixed with the
hot. But all other things connected with man become the more mild and
better in proportion as they are mixed with the more things besides.
But a man is in the best possible state when they are concocted and
at rest, exhibiting no one peculiar quality; but I think I have said
enough in explanation of them.

20. Certain sophists and physicians say that it is not possible for
any one to know medicine who does not know what man is [and how he was
made and how constructed], and that whoever would cure men properly,
must learn this in the first place. But this saying rather appertains
to philosophy, as Empedocles and certain others have described what man
in his origin is, and how he first was made and constructed.[365] But
I think whatever such has been said or written by sophist or physician
concerning nature has less connection with the art of medicine than
with the art of painting. And I think that one cannot know anything
certain respecting nature from any other quarter than from medicine;
and that this knowledge is to be attained when one comprehends the
whole subject of medicine properly, but not until then; and I say
that this history shows what man is, by what causes he was made,
and other things accurately. Wherefore it appears to me necessary
to every physician to be skilled in nature, and strive to know, if
he would wish to perform his duties, what man is in relation to the
articles of food and drink, and to his other occupations, and what
are the effects of each of them to every one. And it is not enough
to know simply that cheese is a bad article of food, as disagreeing
with whoever eats of it to satiety, but what sort of disturbance it
creates, and wherefore, and with what principle in man it disagrees;
for there are many other articles of food and drink naturally bad which
affect man in a different manner. Thus, to illustrate my meaning by an
example, undiluted wine drunk in large quantity renders a man feeble;
and everybody seeing this knows that such is the power of wine, and
the cause thereof; and we know, moreover, on what parts of a man’s
body it principally exerts its action; and I wish the same certainty
to appear in other cases. For cheese (since we used it as an example)
does not prove equally injurious to all men, for there are some who can
take it to satiety without being hurt by it in the least, but, on the
contrary, it is wonderful what strength it imparts to those it agrees
with; but there are some who do not bear it well, their constitutions
are different, and they differ in this respect, that what in their body
is incompatible with cheese, is roused and put in commotion by such a
thing; and those in whose bodies such a humor happens to prevail in
greater quantity and intensity, are likely to suffer the more from it.
But if the thing had been pernicious to the whole nature of man, it
would have hurt all. Whoever knows these things will not suffer from it.

21. During convalescence from diseases, and also in protracted
diseases, many disorders occur, some spontaneously, and some from
certain things accidentally administered. I know that the common herd
of physicians, like the vulgar, if there happen to have been any
innovation made about that day, such as the bath being used, a walk
taken, or any unusual food eaten, all which were better done than
otherwise, attribute notwithstanding the cause of these disorders, to
some of these things, being ignorant of the true cause but proscribing
what may have been very proper. Now this ought not to be so; but one
should know the effects of a bath or a walk unseasonably applied; for
thus there will never be any mischief from these things, nor from any
other thing, nor from repletion, nor from such and such an article of
food. Whoever does not know what effect these things produce upon a
man, cannot know the consequences which result from them, nor how to
apply them.

22. And it appears to me that one ought also to know what diseases
arise in man from the powers, and what from the structures. What do
I mean by this? By powers, I mean intense and strong juices; and by
structures, whatever conformations there are in man. For some are
hollow, and from broad contracted into narrow; some expanded, some hard
and round, some broad and suspended,[366] some stretched, some long,
some dense, some rare and succulent,[367] some spongy and of loose
texture.[368] Now, then, which of these figures is the best calculated
to suck to itself and attract humidity from another body? Whether
what is hollow and expanded, or what is solid and round, or what is
hollow, and from broad, gradually turning narrow? I think such as from
hollow and broad are contracted into narrow: this may be ascertained
otherwise from obvious facts: thus, if you gape wide with the mouth
you cannot draw in any liquid; but by protruding, contracting, and
compressing the lips, and still more by using a tube, you can readily
draw in whatever you wish. And thus, too, the instruments which are
used for cupping are broad below and gradually become narrow, and are
so constructed in order to suck and draw in from the fleshy parts.
The nature and construction of the parts within a man are of a like
nature; the bladder, the head, the uterus in woman; these parts clearly
attract, and are always filled with a juice which is foreign to them.
Those parts which are hollow and expanded are most likely to receive
any humidity flowing into them, but cannot attract it in like manner.
Those parts which are solid and round could not attract a humidity, nor
receive it when it flows to them, for it would glide past, and find no
place of rest on them. But spongy and rare parts, such as the spleen,
the lungs, and the breasts, drink up especially the juices around them,
and become hardened and enlarged by the accession of juices. Such
things happen to these organs especially. For it is not with the spleen
as with the stomach, in which there is a liquid, which it contains and
evacuates every day; but when it (the spleen) drinks up and receives a
fluid into itself, the hollow and lax parts of it are filled, even the
small interstices; and, instead of being rare and soft, it becomes hard
and dense, and it can neither digest nor discharge its contents: these
things it suffers, owing to the nature of its structure. Those things
which engender flatulence or tormina in the body, naturally do so in
the hollow and broad parts of the body, such as the stomach and chest,
where they produce rumbling noises; for when they do not fill the
parts so as to be stationary, but have changes of place and movements,
there must necessarily be noise and apparent movements from them. But
such parts as are fleshy and soft, in these there occur torpor and
obstructions, such as happen in apoplexy. But when it (the flatus?)
encounters a broad and resisting structure, and rushes against such a
part, and this happens when it is by nature not strong so as to be able
to withstand it without suffering injury; nor soft and rare, so as to
receive or yield to it, but tender, juicy, full of blood, and dense,
like the liver, owing to its density and broadness, it resists and does
not yield. But flatus, when it obtains admission, increases and becomes
stronger, and rushes toward any resisting object; but owing to its
tenderness, and the quantity of blood which it (the liver) contains,
it cannot be without uneasiness; and for these reasons the most acute
and frequent pains occur in the region of it, along with suppurations
and chronic tumors (phymata). These symptoms also occur in the site of
the diaphragm, but much less frequently; for the diaphragm is a broad,
expanded, and resisting substance, of a nervous (tendinous?) and strong
nature, and therefore less susceptible of pain; and yet pains and
chronic abscesses do occur about it.

23. There are both within and without the body many other kinds of
structure, which differ much from one another as to sufferings both in
health and disease; such as whether the head be small or large; the
neck slender or thick, long or short; the belly long or round; the
chest and ribs broad or narrow; and many others besides, all which you
ought to be acquainted with, and their differences; so that knowing the
causes of each, you may make the more accurate observations.

24. And, as has been formerly stated, one ought to be acquainted
with the powers of juices, and what action each of them has upon
man, and their alliances towards one another. What I say is this: if
a sweet juice change to another kind, net from any admixture, but
because it has undergone a mutation within itself; what does it first
become?--bitter? salt? austere? or acid? I think acid. And hence, an
acid juice is the most improper of all things that can be administered
in cases in which a sweet juice is the most proper. Thus, if one
should succeed in his investigations of external things, he would be
the better able always to select the best; for that is best which is
farthest removed from that which is unwholesome.
